Introduction

Xenofeminism, or XF, can to some extent be
viewed as a labour of bricolage, synthesizing
cyberfeminism, posthumanism, accelerationism, neorationalism, materialist feminism, and
so on, in an attempt to forge a project suited
to contemporary political conditions. From this
litany of influences xenofeminism assembles, not
a hybrid politics – which would suggest the prior
existence of some impossible, un-hybridized state
– but a politics without ‘the infection of purity’.1
In collecting, discarding, and revising existing
perspectives – in stripping its myriad influences
for parts – xenofeminism positions itself as a
project for which the future remains open as a
site of radical recomposition. This book is a first
1

introduction

attempt at teasing out the underpinnings, arguments, and implications of 2015’s xenofeminist
manifesto in an extended form. However, it is
important to note that this is just one interpretation of a polysemic project – a project riven with
the unresolved tensions that come from collaboration across difference.
Each of the six members of Laboria Cuboniks
– the xenofeminist working group of which I am
a part – would likely emphasize different aspects
of the manifesto, foregrounding some tendencies
over others on account of our varied backgrounds,
interests, and politics. The process of negotiating
between our various feminist commitments has
been one of the most satisfying and illuminating
elements of our collective labour over the past
three years. The manifesto remains a document
that we are all happy to stand behind, and which
we continue to incorporate into our individual
practice – be that as musicians, artists, archaeologists, theorists, activists, coders, or poets. I would
like to use this book to advance my own variation of XF, whilst continuing to acknowledge the
divergent strands shaping the project as a whole.
This is not the book on xenofeminism, then, but
rather a book on xenofeminism.
2

introduction

I would like to start by briefly acknowledging some of the limits of this text, along with
what I hope to achieve over the coming pages.
Xenofeminism is not a thoroughgoing review
of existing academic literature, and nor is it a
lengthy monograph on feminist theories of science and technology. Rather, it is a polemic or a
provocation – one grounded in a self-consciously
idiosyncratic selection of critical material.2 The
references underpinning this text have been
chosen not for their comprehensive articulation of
the simultaneity of gender, technology, race, and
sexualities, but for their suggestiveness and utility in terms of developing one particular strand
of the XF project. The red thread uniting the
chapters that follow represents what I consider to
be one of the most compelling territories for any
emerging xenofeminist position: reproduction,
both biological and social. It is around this theme
that the arguments of Xenofeminism converge.
Chapter 1 offers a partial definition of XF,
sketching out some of the broad concepts
that will ground subsequent chapters. In particular, the manifesto’s treatment of three key
ideas – technomaterialism, anti-naturalism, and
gender abolitionism – will be explored, in order
3

introduction

to indicate where they might contribute to a
xenofeminist politics of reproduction. In Chapter
2, I turn to XF futurities – and, more precisely,
to the need to develop visions of the future that
are based upon neither the prescription nor the
proscription of human biological reproduction.
Using contemporary environmental activism as
a springboard, I point both to the mobilization
of the Child as the privileged icon of a world to
come, and to the anti-natalist tendencies implicit
within recent accounts of a more sustainable
future. Ultimately, I argue, we should look to
foster a form of mutational politics – one that can
be oriented towards practices of xeno-hospitality.
Chapter 3 addresses the topic of XF technologies via an engagement with the feminist health
movement of the 1970s. This section – the longest
of the book – looks to the sometimes problematic
activism of the second wave, not to hold it up
as an aspirational model, but in order to identify some of the possibilities contained within its
partially pursued trajectories. What, I ask, might
the DIY technologies of seventies self-help have
to teach us about bodily autonomy and reproductive sovereignty from an XF perspective? The
conclusion extends this analysis to encompass
4

introduction

contemporary practices of biohacking. In deliberately eschewing the politically tone-deaf
imaginaries of some forms of transhumanism,
and by bringing biohacking into conversation
with both trans* health activism and discourses
of reproductive justice, I hope to emphasize some
of the more materialist dimensions of twentyfirst-century approaches to emancipatory,
self-directed bodily transformation.
Whilst reproduction, in an expanded sense,
remains at the forefront of my articulation of
xenofeminism, other related themes will inevitably arise over the course of the book – themes
such as scalability, labour, intersectionality,
nature, and repurposing. Let us begin, however,
by asking a seemingly simple question: what
is xenofeminism?

5

1
What is Xenofeminism?

XF is a technomaterialist, anti-naturalist, and
gender abolitionist form of feminism. In this
chapter, I will offer a brief outline of each of
these three terms, using Shulamith Firestone’s
contentious manifesto The Dialectic of Sex as a
recurring reference point. First published in 1970,
Firestone’s text claims that humanity’s ‘accumulation of skills for controlling the environment’1
– extending, crucially, to gendered embodiment and biological reproduction – is a means
of realizing ‘the conceivable in the actual’.2 It
therefore looks to technology (including, most
famously, assistive reproductive technologies, but
also forms of domestic automation and industrial
cybernation) as a point of leverage in efforts to
6

what is xenofeminism?

transform oppressive socio-biological conditions.
Her work adopts an ambitious, constructive, and
wide-ranging approach to conceiving of a more
emancipatory future. In this, it has profoundly
shaped the xenofeminist imaginary.
Technomaterialism
Xenofeminism is an attempt to articulate a radical gender politics fit for an era of globality,
complexity, and technology – one which thinks
about technology as an activist tool, whilst
attempting to confront a contemporary reality
‘crosshatched with fibre-optic cables, radio and
microwaves, oil and gas pipelines, aerial and shipping routes, and the unrelenting, simultaneous
execution of millions of communication protocols with every passing millisecond’.3 It seeks to
foreground the more obviously material elements
of (inter)action in contemporary mediated cultures, and draws upon recent engagements with
the digital that foreground its brute physicality
over its supposedly more ethereal qualities – that
is, over ‘the cultural perception that information
and materiality are conceptually distinct and that
information is in some sense more essential, more
7

what is xenofeminism?

important, and more fundamental than materiality’.4 In other words, XF seeks to anchor that
which has been frequently mischaracterized as
free-floating and disembodied within its infrastructural requirements and within the obstinate
physicality of its users and producers (including
those workers engaged in repetitive and poorly
paid labour on electronics assembly lines around
the world).
The project does not reject technology (or science, or rationalism – ideas often understood as
patriarchal constructs), but positions it both as
part of the warp and weft of our everyday lives
and as one potential sphere of activist intervention. Laboria Cuboniks takes a critical interest in
technologies that might seem mundane, such as
domestic labour-saving devices, as well as higherprofile innovations capable of acting as vectors
for new utopias – things like pharmaceuticals,
additivist manufacturing, open source software,
systems of cybersecurity, and post-industrial
automation. Just as these phenomena may be
turned towards furthering the control and domination of labouring bodies, so too might they
represent sites of fertile possibility for the feminist left. Xenofeminism is interested in exploring
8

what is xenofeminism?

and leveraging these affordances – it ‘seeks to
strategically deploy existing technologies to reengineer the world’.5 At the same time, however,
it recognizes that technologies are not inherently
beneficial – indeed, they are not even inherently
neutral – but are in fact constrained and constituted by social relations. This includes specific
design histories, the existing (technical, political,
cultural) infrastructures into which they emerge,
and imbalances in terms of who can access them
– a factor largely dependent upon the character of
the specific technologies in question.
Qualifications of this kind are common to many
technofeminist theories and approaches. Even the
enthusiastic vision of cybernetic communism laid
out in The Dialectic of Sex displays some awareness
of the limits that social context might place upon
a technology’s transformational implications. For
example, Firestone appears cognizant of the fact
that not only is her utopian project attendant
upon the development of suitably sophisticated
technoscientific capacities, but that ‘in the hands
of our current society and under the direction
of current scientists [. . .], any attempted use of
technology to “free” anybody is suspect’.6 Even
her preferred tools for feminist interventions in
9

what is xenofeminism?

embodiment are carefully problematized: reproductive technology, including birth control, is
described as ‘a double-edged sword [. . .] to envision it in the hands of the present powers is to
envision a nightmare’.7 Although hardly famous
for the moderation of her arguments, it is clear
that Firestone is attuned to the fact that the uses
of both computational and biological technologies will be dependent upon the wider structures
in which they are embedded.
In her response to The Dialectic of Sex, Sarah
Franklin remarks that Firestone ‘envisaged technology both as an agent of, and a means of salvation
from, social and environmental degradation,
whilst constantly reminding her readers that science and technology could not achieve these ends
in the absence of radical social change, including
a wholesale regendering of scientific knowledge’.8
In Firestone’s analysis, technology is presented
as both a ‘driver and a symptom, imbricated in a
wider process of historical unfolding’;9 technoscientific developments must therefore be seen as a
significant influence upon socio-political change.
However, this influence is by no means unidirectional. The relationship between technology
and social relations is complex, mutually shaping,
10

what is xenofeminism?

dynamic, and dependent upon continuous conversation. Shifts in one area will influence the
evolution of the other, which in turn feedbacks
into further developments, in an ongoing process of co-constitution. Technology is as social as
society is technical.
Technologies, then, need to be conceptualized
as social phenomena, and therefore as available for
transformation through collective struggle (a fact
of which Firestone herself is well aware, even as
she uses technologies to imagine a radically alien
future). Technological change is a ‘process subject to struggles for control by different groups’,
the outcomes of which are profoundly shaped by
‘the distribution of power and resources within
society’.10 As such, any emancipatory technofeminism must take the form of a concerted political
intervention, sensitive to the fused character of
the structures of oppression that make up our
material worlds. It is in this spirit that xenofeminism seeks to balance an attentiveness to the
differential impact technologies can have upon
women, queers, and the gender non-conforming,
with a critical openness to the (constrained but
genuine) transformative potential of technologies. This extends to an interest in how we might
11

what is xenofeminism?

design or appropriate devices, knowledges, and
processes for gender-political ends.
Anti-Naturalism
Xenofeminism’s technomaterialism is complemented by its commitment to anti-naturalism.
Indeed, the project’s investment in and alignment
with contemporary technological landscapes
is, in part, an elaboration of precisely this
commitment. Hence, Laboria Cuboniks declares
that:
Our lot is cast with technoscience, where nothing is so sacred that it cannot be reengineered and
transformed so as to widen our aperture of freedom, extending to gender and the human. To say
that nothing is sacred, that nothing is transcendent or protected from the will to know, to tinker,
and to hack, is to say that nothing is supernatural. ‘Nature’ – understood here, as the unbounded
arena of science – is all there is.11

In other words, science and technology enable a
particular set of conscious interventions within
the so-called ‘natural’ world. Such interventions
12

what is xenofeminism?

have the potential to extend human freedom – for
example, by furthering reproductive autonomy
and allowing us to exert control (however contingent, contested, and constrained) over what
happens to our own bodies. Nature is understood here not as an essentializing underpinning
for embodiment or ecology, but as a technologized space of conflict that fundamentally shapes
lived experiences.
The always precarious distinction between
nature and culture has been definitively blown
apart by changes within science and technology. Whilst the collapse of such categorical
distinctions arguably detracts from the utility of social constructivism as an analytic tool
– particularly when it comes to exposing the
mutability of identities – it simultaneously works
to open up that which might previously have
been viewed as untouchable (the ‘natural’) as a
site of intercession and agency. This refusal to
frame nature as only and always the unyielding
limit to emancipatory imaginaries is a key element of the xenofeminist project, and a further
point of resonance with The Dialectics of Sex.
‘Pregnancy’, Firestone writes, ‘is the temporary
deformation of the body of the individual for
13

what is xenofeminism?

the sake of the species.’12 She notes that gestation and childbirth are painful, risky, and beset
with difficulties for the bodies that perform
them. As such, she views the development of
new reproductive technologies – including, but
not limited to, those facilitating ectogenesis – as
an unprecedented opportunity for ending the
oppression of the impregnatable.
This is the belief motivating Firestone’s
demand that people should be freed ‘from the
tyranny of reproduction by every means possible’.13
This is probably the position with which she is
most closely associated, and it is certainly the one
for which she is most frequently castigated. There
are indeed troubling aspects to her treatment
of this issue, not least her apparent insensitivity to the eugenicist uses to which reproductive
technologies might be put (a fact made painfully
apparent in the raced and classed histories of sterilization abuse and involuntary tubal ligations). As
Franklin remarks, however, much of the hostility
directed towards The Dialectic of Sex has been
somewhat neglectful of the text itself. As such, it
‘remains important to ask what the positioning of
Firestone as a naïve technological determinist and
the frequent chastisement of [. . .] her claim that
14

what is xenofeminism?

new reproductive technologies could bring about
women’s liberation reveals about the evolution of
feminist debate over reproduction and technology’.14 With this in mind, I would like to turn to
a different feminist perspective – one particularly
inhospitable to Firestone’s line of reasoning.
The ecofeminists Maria Mies and Vandana
Shiva have argued that ‘science’s whole paradigm is characteristically patriarchal, anti-nature
and colonial and aims to dispossess women of
their generative capacity as it does the productive
capacities of nature’.15 This strategic mobilization
of nature and the natural informs much of Mies’
work in particular, and can result in her adoption of somewhat eccentric critical positions. At
one point in the essay ‘White Man’s Dilemma’,
for example, Mies argues that ‘From time immemorial, women have dealt with pregnancy and
childbirth in a creative way. But this creative process, this natural power, was not totally controlled
by them, rather to a certain extent it remained
“wild”.’16 This ‘wildness’ – the fact that pregnancy is something that occurs within the body
without conscious deliberation or mediation – is
supposedly part of what makes the whole process
so enchanting:
15

what is xenofeminism?
The woman does not have a blueprint in her head
according to which she makes the child. She may
have fantasies, wishes, but the child that forms
in her body, in co-operation with nature, which
she herself represents and is, is not determined by
her will. Ultimately, neither the process nor the
‘product’ are at her disposal. I think it is precisely
this unpredictability that constitutes the newness
of each child and provides the fulfilment that is
being sought.17

This natural process is, of course, in direct contrast to technologically assisted reproduction, in
which bioengineers are viewed as constructing
the child as if it were a machine, made from
isolated component parts. In this version of the
reproductive process, human beings are in possession of a far greater degree of direct agency
and control; ergo, the process loses its magic and
is no longer experienced as ‘creative, productive
and spontaneous’.18
Mies’ take on this phenomenon is to adulate
the threatened wilderness of the cis woman’s
bodily interior, claiming that it seems ‘obvious
that what is sought is exactly the opposite of what
the myth of modernity has promised and sees as
16

what is xenofeminism?

positive: the total control of nature and natural
processes by science and technology, the “civilizing”, that is, taming of all “wild” forces of nature
for the benefit of man’.19 Despite Mies having
earlier argued against reproductive technology on the basis that it ‘alienates both men and
women from their bodies’20 – which is presented
as being a self-evidently Bad Thing – it would
seem that what is being venerated here is the fact
of being alienated from the reproductive process
by nature itself. Reproductive technology offers
a disenchanted alienation, achieved via devolving epistemic authority to medical experts, whilst
nature offers a (for some reason vastly preferable)
enchanting alienation, achieved via the subjection of the impregnated body to forces beyond
its control. This, apparently, is the source of the
fulfilment human beings are looking for – the
magnification of uncertainty, unpredictability,
and disenfranchisement.
The apparent suggestion that gestation and
labour should be beyond one’s control is particularly troubling, given the myriad health risks
still associated with pregnancy and childbirth.
In her investment in natural alienation, Mies
comes perilously close to romanticizing physical
17

what is xenofeminism?

endangerment. It is also worth stressing the (rather
obvious) point that such a position downplays
the extent to which impregnatable subjects
appreciate agential control over their own bodies.
Indeed, a relatively high degree of bodily sovereignty is arguably one of the things that people
value most highly about developments in the
medical management of contraception, conception, pregnancy, and birth – as well as one of the
things that many are most concerned to protect
when it comes to differentially distributed and
continually threatened access to abortion. Mies’
love letter to disempowerment seems to bear little
relation to the way in which many people experience the vulnerabilities and anxieties attendant
on biological reproduction.
Unwelcome suffering, whether due to natural
bodily processes or complex and repressive sociotechnical systems, does not offer an appealing
basis for feminist politics, and is clearly untenable as a platform for emancipation. However,
whilst celebrating the former implies an attitude
of acquiescence (a serenity in the face of things
that supposedly cannot be changed), the latter
lends itself more obviously to an anti-naturalist
politics bent on ‘untangling what ought to be
18

what is xenofeminism?

from what is’.21 In other words, positioning the
body as a potential site for feminist technopolitical intervention is one possible tool in a refusal to
inevitabilize suffering. I am not trying to make
a case for the inherently or essentially liberatory
powers of technoscience here.22 Rather, I wish
to indicate a structural orientation within the
xenofeminist project towards radical (re)composition and away from foreclosure. The future is
under construction.
XF is an anti-naturalist endeavour in the
sense that it frames nature and the natural as a
space for contestation – that is, as within the
purview of politics. Any political project based
upon nature as a pseudo-theological limit, a
cartography of the untouchable, or a space of
incontaminable purity risks lending huge conceptual resources to the conservative punishment
of radical difference. As we put it in the xenofeminist manifesto,
Nothing should be accepted as fixed, permanent,
or ‘given’ – neither material conditions nor social
forms. [. . .] Anyone who’s been deemed ‘unnatural’ in the face of reigning biological norms, anyone
who’s experienced injustices wrought in the name

19

what is xenofeminism?
of natural order, will realize that the glorification
of ‘nature’ has nothing to offer us – the queer and
trans among us, the differently-abled, as well as
those who have suffered discrimination due to
pregnancy or duties connected to child-rearing.23

With these comments, we position ourselves as
Haraway’s disobedient daughters. We too find
‘discourses of natural harmony, the nonalien,
and purity unsalvageable for understanding our
genealogy in the New World Order, Inc.’, and
agree that it ‘will not help – intellectually, morally, or politically – to appeal to the natural and
the pure’.24
But to declare ourselves anti-naturalist is not
to disavow the measurable and/or spontaneously
occurring phenomena that structure our world,
generate observable effects, and shape the horizons of possibility. Xenofeminism does not deny
that there is a biological stratum to embodied
reality, for example – that certain bodies have
different susceptibilities and capacities (most
obviously, in the context of this discussion, the
susceptibility or capacity to incubate a foetus).
What is does dispute, however, is the idea that
this stratum is immutable or fixed simply because
20

what is xenofeminism?

it is biological. On the one hand, this involves
acknowledging the role that social ideas play in
understandings of embodiment (including insisting that many notions about gendered bodies are
ideological). More radically, perhaps, it involves
framing the terrain of biology as itself rightfully
subject to change. XF stands with those contemporary feminists who insist that ‘biology is not a
synonym for determinism and sociality is not a
synonym for transformation’.25 The operations
of these realms are nowhere near so predictable.
Elizabeth A. Wilson contends that ‘anatomy
enacts the kind of malleability, heterogeneity, friction and unpredictability that feminist
theories can relish’,26 and argues that we should
‘recapture biology for feminist theory’.27 XF
agrees, and (as we shall see throughout this book)
pursues an interest in an anti-naturalist nature
at the levels of both theory and practice. Rather
than cede this territory to conservative or corporate interests – which have, for several decades,
been angling for the enclosure of biomedically
manipulable bodies28 – we must reframe the evident (if partial) changeability of nature as a space
for emancipatory politics. As Firestone puts it,
‘every fact of nature that is understood can be
21

what is xenofeminism?

used to alter it’.29 Biology is not destiny, because
biology itself can be technologically transformed,
and should be transformed in the pursuit of
reproductive justice and the progressive transformation of gender. XF emphasizes what it sees as
the fundamental mutability of bodies, identities,
and the various processes that help to shape them;
it recognizes the often violently denied plurality of spontaneously occurring gender diversity
(as in the myriad forms of intersexuality); and is
invested in a proactive and emancipatory reworking of the gendered and sexual order.
Gender Abolitionism
The final characteristic I wish to consider is
xenofeminism’s agitation for the abolition of the
binary gender system, which is to some extent
built upon our commitment to anti-naturalism.
If nature is folded into the domain of politics,
and both norms and bodies are conceived of as
malleable, then that which we currently think
of as gender is one obvious domain of emancipatory transformation. But why talk about
abolition in this context? If gender is available to
be remade into something better, why not seek
22

what is xenofeminism?

to rehabilitate it? Such questions relate to the
avowed status of XF as a transfeminism. How may
we square arguments for gender abolition with
advocacy for less restrictive access to technologies of transition, and how can a project invested
in maximizing trans* rights and freedoms make
effective use of Firestone’s perspective, given her
seemingly rigid focus on dimorphic gender and
reproductive embodiment?
In the previous section, we discussed the
body’s position as a reworkable platform, and the
affordances that come with approaching it from
a perspective of ontological anti-naturalism. It
is in this context that The Dialectic of Sex retains
its potential xenofeminist utility, despite the
relative invisibility of trans* people within its
diagnosis of gendered oppression. As Nina Power
notes, ‘Firestone’s approach to the question of
sex is refreshingly blunt. Sex difference is real.
Men and women exist, and possess asymmetrical
physical capacities which have historically made
existence for women extremely difficult and frequently unpleasant or even lethal.’30 Firestone
observes, however, that with the development
of increasingly sophisticated means of birth
control and artificial reproduction, technology
23

what is xenofeminism?

has ‘created real pre-conditions for overthrowing these oppressive “natural” conditions, along
with their cultural reinforcements’.31 For a condition to be described as natural at this historical
juncture is no reason to assume that it cannot
be changed.
But however refreshing or otherwise we might
find the expression of biological materialism in
Firestone’s work, there is much that needs to be
negotiated or qualified in terms of her understanding of ‘woman’, especially if we aim to
incorporate elements of her perspective into
twenty-first-century transfeminism. The Dialectic
of Sex insists that the sex-class system is based
upon biological disadvantages suffered by those
capable of conceiving, gestating, and bearing a
child. In Firestone’s account, this group is called
women – but given that this term is a woefully
inadequate label for the group to which she is
referring, we may not wish to follow her in this.
The position that will better enable us to put
Firestone’s ideas to use is one that recognizes the
existence of various embodied differences (and
the manner in which such differences have been
culturally exploited) whilst understanding that it
is a ‘social act to reduce these to the existence of
24

what is xenofeminism?

an irreducible dichotomy [. . .] correlating with
the functional differences between participants
in biological reproduction (remembering that
“participants in biological reproduction,” even
potential participants, are a subset of the set of all
human beings and not identical with that set)’.32
It is notable that, whilst elements of Firestone’s
perspective on gender tend towards the problematically dimorphic as a consequence of this focus
on sexual reproduction, her work also agitates
for an eventual end to the binary gender system.
Hence, she argues that
just as the end goal of socialist revolution was not
only the elimination of the economic class privilege
but of the economic class distinction itself, so the
end goal of feminist revolution must be [. . .] not
just the elimination of male privilege but of the sex
distinction itself: genital difference between human
beings would no longer matter culturally.33

She moves from reproductive embodiment
(firmly equated with two distinct sex-classes) as
the source of oppression and foundational division of labour, to a vision of the eradication of
this oppression by and through the dissolution of
25

what is xenofeminism?

gender itself. According to this vision, technologically facilitated changes in material experiences
of biological reproduction allow gendered ideologies to be overwritten; the categorization of
people on the basis of a limited set of physical
differences is overcome.
This current within The Dialectic of Sex has
led certain theorists to view it as an example of
trans-positive second-wave feminism. Susan
Stryker, for example, uses the passage cited above
to argue that feminisms from the 1970s ‘were
not uniformly hostile to transgender and transsexual people’.34 For Stryker, Firestone’s gender
abolitionism – born out of ontological antinaturalism – is part of a ‘vision of transgender
inclusion in progressive feminist movements
for social change’.35 However, just as secondwave feminism includes a wealth of (sometimes
incompatible) perspectives, so too does contemporary transfeminism. Not all trans* activist
positions accommodate such a virulent strain
of Firestonian anti-naturalism. Indeed, many
organizations explicitly dispute any suggestion
that being trans* might be considered a choice
– a disputation which can manifest itself as strategic naturalism.36 Such perspectives see nature not
26

what is xenofeminism?

as a protean platform, but as both a stable origin
and an incontestable endpoint – a view that is
obviously at odds with xenofeminist ideas.
Within positions founded upon a claim of
being ‘born this way’, one finds supposedly
in-built characteristics leveraged as a kind of transcendental guarantee: ‘we are told to seek solace
in unfreedom [. . .] as if offering an excuse with
nature’s blessing’.37 Problematically, the current ‘politics of trans liberation have staked their
claims on a redemptive understanding of identity. Whether through a doctor or psychologist’s
diagnosis, or through personal self-affirmation
in the form of a social utterance, we have come
to believe that there is some internal truth to
gender that we must divine.’38 Such concessions
are understandable given the perpetually embattled condition of queer and trans* communities.
Indeed, inevitabilizing one’s own existence is a
pretty shrewd move when labouring to ensure
one’s basic survival. However, XF would question the long-term utility of positioning these
approaches as the primary form of trans* politics, given that they mark a retreat from one of
the most radical and emancipatory tendencies
of transfeminism: its capacity to operate as ‘an
27

what is xenofeminism?

arduous assertion of freedom against an order
that seemed immutable’.39
This is in no way to position trans* subjects
as particularly at fault for reinforcing the gender
binary; this is the hallmark of a reprehensible
Trans Exclusionary Radical Feminism bent on
attacking those already ‘most hurt by gender’.40
Nor is this an attempt to ‘deny the lived experiences of many of our trans siblings who have
had an experience of gender since a young age’.41
Rather, it is a move to ‘acknowledge that such
an experience of gender was always already
determined through the terms of power’.42 In
recognizing the necessity of what the Black
Panthers called ‘survival pending revolution’
– and insisting always on securing and broadening access to the juridical, medical, and social
technologies of transition for all those who want
them – we must not lose sight of our aspirations
for what the ‘revolution’ itself might involve. As
such, queer anti-naturalist gender abolitionism
must claim its place alongside certain species of
strategic trans* naturalism as part of any effective
and multi-pronged ecology of activisms. What
form, then, would a xenofeminist gender abolitionism take?
28

what is xenofeminism?

The first thing to note is that the designation
‘gender abolitionist’ is somewhat misleading.
There are two key reasons for this. First of all,
the term does not explicitly encompass the full
scope of Laboria Cuboniks’ ambitions. It is not
just gender that we seek to dismantle, but various
other structures that come to act as a (frequently
naturalized – and thus rigidified) basis of oppression. We believe that traits associated not just with
gender, but also with race, class, able-bodiedness,
and so on, are unevenly loaded with social stigma,
and often contribute to cultures of inequality.43
Whilst the current political value of mobilizing
around these categories does need to be acknowledged, xenofeminism argues that (in the longer
term) the full range of these traits should be
stripped of their social significance, and therefore
of their ability to act as vectors of discrimination.
To quote the manifesto, gender abolitionism is
‘shorthand for the ambition to construct a society
where traits currently assembled under the rubric
of gender no longer furnish a grid for the asymmetric operation of power’.44 The struggle must
continue until currently gendered and racialized
characteristics are no more a basis of discrimination than the colour of one’s eyes, or whether or
29

what is xenofeminism?

not one has freckles, or whether or not one can
roll one’s tongue: that is, until they no longer
operate as the basis of a claim to a socially legible
identity. In short, then, XF’s gender abolitionism
seek to unpick any culturally weaponized markers of identity that harbour injustices.
Secondly, the phrase ‘gender abolitionism’ risks
coming across as a demand for the paring back of
gender – a demand that difference itself be abolished. This is not what we are advocating for at
all. XF is not a call for gender austerity, but for
gender post-scarcity! It does not seek ‘the eradication of what are currently considered “gendered”
traits from the human population’ – not least
because, under current conditions, ‘such a project could only spell disaster – the notion of what
is “gendered” sticks disproportionately to the
feminine’.45 If anything, it is the restrictions upon
gendered identity that we want to see scrapped;
the tenacious binary thinking that continues to
funnel identities into male and female, feminine
and masculine, despite the obvious paucity of
this model. Far from producing a genderless
world, then, this form of abolition through proliferation is suggestive of a multiply gendered
world. Xenofeminism is gender abolitionist in
30

what is xenofeminism?

the sense that it rejects the validity of any social
order anchored in identities as a basis of oppression, and in the sense that we embrace sexuate
diversity beyond any binary.
Laboria Cuboniks advocates for the system of
gender difference to be abolished via the proliferation of gender differences – ‘Let a hundred
sexes bloom!’46 This must go beyond insisting
on recognition for a wider range of identity
categories – a move which, as with the numerous self-categorizing options available to us on
Facebook, can generate a ‘plural but static constellation’,47 in which gender continues to bear
the weight of signifying something beyond itself
(attitudes, capacities, affinities, consumer behaviours, and so on). The aim of this proliferation is
not the beautiful blooming of a hundred dropdown menu options, but the stripping away of
social ramifications associated with the heterosexual matrix. Like some of our cyberfeminist
forerunners, XF stresses the need to ‘render
gender laughable and obsolete in its frigidity
and instrumentality’.48 The recognition of innumerable genders is therefore only a first step in
the refusal to accept any gender as a basis of
stable signification.
31

what is xenofeminism?

To adopt such a position is not to suggest that
‘we remain blind to differences among peoples
and cultures and colours and sexualities and
identities – as if that were even possible. But it
does mean that we interrupt the chain of causality
that all these categories imply in their formulation.’49 For xenofeminism, gender should be
granted no extraordinary explanatory power. We
must look for more nimble and inclusive vectors
of solidarity. XF is, amongst other things, a technomaterialst, anti-naturalist, gender abolitionist
form of feminism. In the material that follows, I
will trace out how these and other key xenofeminist traits might manifest themselves in relation
to an expanded understanding of reproduction.

32

2
Xenofeminist Futurities

Xenofeminism is invested in constructing an
alien future. To do so, however, requires confronting familiar images of the time ahead
– images in which futurity is reduced to the replication of the same via the social reproduction
of today’s hegemonic values, or in which it is
rendered impossible due to projected climate collapse. How can one propose a forward-looking
gender politics that takes contemporary conditions seriously without falling into either of these
traps – oppressive conservatism, on the one hand,
and debilitating hopelessness, on the other? In
his 2004 book No Future: Queer Theory and the
Death Drive, Lee Edelman famously takes issue
with the future as a heteronormative construct,
33

xenofeminist futurities

anchoring his analysis in the figure of the Child.
This chapter considers the framing of the future
within contemporary environmental activism,
with particular reference to its mobilization of
this figure.
For Edelman, the contemporary world is characterized by a reproductive futurism in which the
‘Child remains the perpetual horizon of every
acknowledged politics, the fantasmatic beneficiary of every political intervention’.1 As he puts
it, we encounter the
disciplinary image of the Child [. . .] on every
side as the lives, the speech, and the freedoms of
adults face constant threat of legal curtailment
out of deference to imaginary Children whose
futures, as if they were permitted to have them
except as they consist in the prospect of passing
them on to Children of their own, are construed
as endangered by the social disease as which queer
sexualities register.2

The needs of adults – particularly nonreproductive adults – are constantly subordinated
to those of Children as bearers of the idea of
the future. Edelman’s primary examples of this
34

xenofeminist futurities

phenomenon are rampant cultural homophobia
and so-called ‘pro-life’ activism.
He argues that when we think the future, which
is largely the terrain of politics, we inevitably perpetuate a culture that is laudatory of the Child,
and therefore supportive of ideologies of the
family that are both hetero- and homonormative.
Whilst heterosexual sex and the monogamous,
dyadic relationship form are socially sanctioned
via the ‘alibi’ of biological and social reproduction, the queer comes to represent the ‘violent
undoing of meaning, the loss of identity and
coherence, the unnatural access to jouissance’.3 It
is the irredeemable Other. The only proportionate response to this state of affairs is, for Edelman,
refusal – the refusal of politics, the refusal of the
future, the refusal of the Child. Those beyond
the sanctified confines of heteronormativity are
to embrace the death drive and to become what
reproductive futurism has already decided that
they are – just a bunch of selfish queers.
Edelman’s work is quite clearly a polemic,
gleefully spooking the straights and denouncing
the ‘fascism of the baby’s face’.4 As such it is
perversely seductive – not to mention seductive
in its perversity – and compellingly, charmingly,
35

xenofeminist futurities

spiteful. It also alerts those of us with an interest
in political activism to some of the risks inherent in framing the future. How are ideas about
the Child and the family mobilized within contemporary activisms? When and how is this
mobilization problematic from a queer and feminist standpoint, and in what ways can we fight
for a better, more emancipatory future without
relying on reproductive futurism? That is, how
can we advocate for xenofeminist futures without
falling back on an exclusionary and counterproductive imaginary centred upon making the
world a better place for ‘our’ children?
Pro-Nat(ur)al Politics
Climate change activism is particularly entangled
with the envisioning of a world to come, given
that it is fighting for precisely those conditions
needed to sustain an earthly future – the environmental necessities upon which human and
non-human life depend. Within climate change
activism, the image of the Child often operates as
handy rhetorical shorthand for the future itself,
but (predictably) does so at the cost of inadvertently promoting the values of reproductive
36

xenofeminist futurities

futurism. Ecofeminist perspectives, for example,
are capable of providing nuanced analyses of the
conceptual fusion of gender, race, and nature,
yet can at times rely upon limited conceptions
of the family and the Child. We frequently find
women’s role as environmental guardians attributed to their connection with practices such as
familial care, subsistence farming, and social
reproduction.
This is a solid approach, up to a point; understanding how material conditions and gendered
expectations cultivate or restrict certain forms of
knowledge can generate productive and important insights. However, the point at which a
recognition of historical gender roles tips into
an apparent naturalization of these roles is the
point at which this approach loses its XF efficacy.
It is a common criticism levelled at ecofeminism
that it essentializes gender – that it links women
with a biological capacity to give birth, and associates this capacity with a greater concern with
ecology. Sometimes, these criticisms can themselves feel unduly reductive, dismissing a range
of progressive and intersectional perspectives
because of their emergence within a field with
a reputation for gender essentialism. However,
37

xenofeminist futurities

whilst important ideas have been developed
within ecofeminism, it has at times failed to
recognize how the discourse it facilitates might
(perhaps inadvertently) mythologize femininity.
Sometimes, this mythologization is fairly literal, as in Mies’ 2015 essay ‘Mother Earth’. This
text discusses images of the Earth Mother as a
recurring feature of pre-capitalist cultures, before
the emergence of ‘Man the Warrior’,5 thereby
reinforcing a particular set of ideas about the gendering of care, violence, and so on.
This gendered mythology is accompanied by
clear conceptualizations of the maternal role in
environmental stewardship, with Mies claiming
that ‘Women, mothers, were among the first to
recognise [environmental dangers], because they
ask: What future will our children have in such
a world?’6 In speaking of women and mothers, Mies conflates these two social categories of
personhood, implicitly advancing a biologized
conception of womanhood as a reproductive role, and homogenizing what can count as
‘women’s experience’. To claim a central place
for women within environmental struggles on
the basis of assumptions about their biological
and inherent social reproductive capacity, then,
38

xenofeminist futurities

risks not only homogenizing but also essentializing particular ways of doing gender. The risk of
a project that accords women a special role owing
to their embodied connection with mothering
– a project that not only feminizes creation but
also masculinizes destruction – is that the future
terms of engagement around ideas such as otherdirectedness, responsibility, attentiveness, and so
on, are restricted by their funnelling into existing
gendered paradigms.
If womanhood = motherhood, and motherhood = the ability to nurture, and all of this is
grounded in a very particular image of dichotomized reproductive bodies, then there seems to
be precious little opportunity for challenging (let
alone abolishing!) hegemonic gender roles. Like
all manifestations of nature, gender must not
be confused with a pure and timeless structure
– which is not to dismiss the centrality of gendered and reproductive embodiment within
lived experiences or cultural constructions of the
natural world. The challenge is to acknowledge
the importance of, say, the gendered division
of labour and the histories of familial forms
without discounting the diversity of ‘feminine’
engagements with ecology or providing further
39

xenofeminist futurities

discursive support for the idea of a binary gender
system marked by inherently feminine or masculine practices and abilities. This is, of course, a
very delicate balance to strike, but could perhaps
be broadly characterized by a shift away from
naturalized identities towards an appreciation of
mutable, historically and geographically situated
processes (of re/productive labour, for example)
as a basis for xenofeminist solidarities.
Whilst Mies’ work is a particularly clear example of the problems that can arise from conflating
women, maternity, and a seemingly essential
relationship to the environment, it’s important
to note that this critical position is not unique. In
fact, it crops up with some frequency in contemporary ecofeminism. kaitlin butler and Carolyn
Raffensperger, for example, suggest that women’s
‘roles as caretakers bring them close to natural cycles’, causing them to see ‘environmental
threats to their children wherever they turn’.7
Joy McConnell, meanwhile, argues that ‘women’s major role in civilizations around the world
has been the bearing and nurturing of children
and the welfare of families. Women have seen
through our own experiences that everything
is interconnected and interdependent.’8 This
40

xenofeminist futurities

supposedly generates a particular aptitude for
ecological advocacy. At the very least, the way in
which these ideas are articulated de-emphasizes
the mutational possibilities within gender roles
and familial relationships. Such positions are
arguably in the service of reproductive futurism:
that is to say, they assert the absolute centrality
and importance of the Child for environmental activism as a result of their tendency towards
maternity-centric accounts of women’s relationships with proximal ecosystems.
Somebody Think of the Children
Ecofeminist perspectives broadly align with
mainstream environmentalism, which also makes
frequent use of the figure of the Child. We might
think here of the aesthetic framing of contemporary climate change activism in Europe and
North America, including the imagery used to
promote the 2014 People’s Climate March in
London, New York, Paris, and elsewhere. On
posters spread across urban transit networks, one
encountered an ethereal nymph-child, clutching
a toy windmill whilst staring wide-eyed into the
future. We could also include the UN’s 2009
41

xenofeminist futurities

‘Hopenhagen’ advertising campaign, which was
used to promote the Copenhagen Summit and
to raise awareness about plans for a global climate change treaty. The campaign relied heavily
on images of the young, and made particularly
prominent use of white, blond-haired boys.9
The environmental advocacy project Environment Illinois, meanwhile, used an image of a
small child riding a bicycle as part of materials to raise awareness about the health impacts
of coal-burning power plants, accompanied by
the slogan ‘No Helmet Can Protect Your Child
From Mercury Poisoning’. Writing about this
image, Nicole Seymour points out that ‘heterosexism in environmentalism often goes unnoticed
and thus unchallenged, because it seems so sensible. To wit: the Environment Illinois ad expects
an audience for whom the connection between
reproductive futurity and environmental protection is a no-brainer.’10 Its strategy also relies upon
a mode of address that interpellates the viewer as
a current or future participant in the process of
species reproduction; we are hailed as parental
protectors, in the expectation that we will unresistingly heed this call. Not only is the Child now
a well-established cultural shorthand for a time
42

xenofeminist futurities

to come (a time which is increasingly endangered
by our actions in the present), but there is widespread social consensus that appeals on behalf of
the Child must not be refused.
Indeed, as Edelman puts it, what value could be
‘so unquestioned, because so obviously unquestionable, as that of the Child whose innocence
solicits our defence’?11 There are very few positions from which a call to act on the behalf of
children can justifiably be resisted, and as such,
this imagery can be thought of as an effective
force of political mobilization. If the Child can
be so utilized within the course of eco-activist
struggles, then why protest against it? Surely, in
the era of the Capitalocene, it’s a case of ‘whatever
works’? The risk is that relying upon the rhetoric
of reproductive futurity cultivates and fosters heterosexist discrimination – both in direct relation
to ideas about protecting the environment, and
more generally in terms of attitudes to gender
and sexual dissidence. Indeed, the operations of
reproductive futurism may foreclose the possibility of the ‘xeno’ by tying procreation to the
endless propagation of the same – particularly
in terms of structural oppressions, class values,
and species chauvinism. As such, biological
43

xenofeminist futurities

reproduction is rolled into social reproduction,
in the sense that it is implicitly assumed to represent the generational transmission of inequalities.
The counterpoint of reproductive futurism
within contemporary climate activism is fear of
a queer planet. Discussing cultures surrounding public sex between men, for example, Andil
Gosine writes that ‘One of the most popular
strategies engaged by police and other opponents
of sexual activity in natural spaces has been to
present themselves as protectors of children.’12
Another ‘commonly employed strategy towards
this effect has been to equate sex with pollution,
and to focus on the litter and damage to the
environment produced by homosexual acts’.13 In
both of these approaches, queer subjects become
pollutants, metaphorically and literally; a threat
to both the social body (through their corrupting influence on children) and the so-called
‘natural’ world (through their excessive waste).
Condom wrappers and lubricant are framed as
environmentally damaging, and the response
demanded is the eradication of public sex –
rather than, say, the installation of rubbish bins
in appropriate areas.
Not only does non-reproductive sexual activity
44

xenofeminist futurities

circulate as a kind of toxin within some forms of
eco-activist discourse, but queer subjects are positioned as the result of the circulation of toxicants
in others. As Giovanna di Chiro notes in her
essay on the topic,
the dominant anti-toxics discourse deployed in
mainstream environmentalism adopts the potent
rhetoric that toxic chemical pollution is responsible
for the undermining or perversion of the ‘natural’: natural biologies/ecologies, natural bodies,
natural reproductive processes. This contemporary
environmental anxiety appeals to cultural fears of
exposure to chemical and endocrine-disrupting
toxins as troubling and destabilizing the normal/
natural gendered body of humans and other
animal species.14

There is a cultural fascination with animal
indicators of toxic pollution that emphasize nonnormative gendered attributes (abnormally tiny
alligator penises, intersex rats with unexpected
nipples) or sexual behaviours (co-habiting ‘lesbian’ herring gulls). The toxic effects of chemical
contaminants, in other words, are positioned
as manifesting themselves at the level of the
45

xenofeminist futurities

compromised and polluted socio-sexual body.15
These specific effects of contamination can come
to be emphasized even above effects such as cancer
– to be seen as more threatening, more disruptive.
To quote one of the most influential popular
texts on the topic – Our Stolen Future from 1996
– the ‘danger we face is not simply death and disease. By disrupting hormones and development,
these synthetic chemicals may be changing who
we become. They may be altering our destinies.’16
Mainstream anti-toxics discourse, then, takes a
stand against a certain idea of the mutational in
the name of an unaltered future.
The point here is not that eco-activism
shouldn’t concern itself with the effects of chemical contaminants upon gendered embodiment,
or that to do so is inherently discriminatory; in
fact, a number of transfeminist theorists have
stressed the particular need for a proactive theory
of synthetic androgens in an era in which hormones pervasively circulate as pollutants.17
Alongside Michelle Murphy, I would argue that
if ‘living being is now hailed as alterable, and
materially transformable in new ways, opening
new possibilities for a malleable ontology of life,
chemical injury calls for a more critical politics
46

xenofeminist futurities

of alterability and greater attention to the kinds,
modes, and exercise of power manifest in malleable life’.18 Such attentiveness is crucial to any
xenofeminist understanding of anti-naturalism
and the technomaterial. It should nevertheless
concern us that this environmental activism is
‘hyper-focusing sexual anxiety around ambiguity, variability, and changeability’,19 with
sexuate diversity being positioned as a kind of
industrial accident.
As di Chiro notes, it seems unwarranted that
popular science and journalistic coverage should
choose to dedicate so many column inches to ‘the
seemingly unrelenting offensive on the stability
and reliability of the human male reproductive
capacity and sexual orientation’.20 Alexis Shotwell
agrees, pointing to the fact that many popular
accounts of the dangers of toxicants choose to
concentrate not on ‘death, or pain, but rather a
maldistribution of sex selection proportional to
the norm’.21 As she convincingly argues,
The subtext of this discourse is that feminization or
queerness are harms to be avoided and reasons to
pursue noncontaminated waters and bodies. The
logic here is that straight and non-disabled bodily

47

xenofeminist futurities
formation – heterosexual practice and a hypostatized cis/gender conforming body that lines up with
current classifications of who is disabled – are the
norm from which any form of difference deviates.22

An XF ecopolitics must combine an attentiveness to the biological strata of reality within
which bodies of various kinds can be affected by
chemical and other forms of potentially harmful
contaminants, with a rigorous anti-naturalizing
tendency and an unwavering commitment to
bodily autonomy.
There is a generalized over-reliance on ideas
about natural sexuality and gender within contemporary conceptualizations of toxic effects,
then – that is, there is a concern with reproduction as the means by which the future is secured,
not simply in terms of biomaterial conditions,
but in terms of normative socio-sexual conditions. The anxiety is not so much that the species
will cease to exist but that it might be mutated,
altered, or (xeno)feminized. What has been
stolen is the ability to guarantee sameness – the
unquestioned replication of established forms of
gendered embodiment and sexual subjectivity. In
this sense, of course, many of us might aspire to a
48

xenofeminist futurities

state of toxic queerness, labouring to undermine
things-as-they-are in favour of different and more
emancipatory futures. Here, in a different form,
we encounter the influence of reproductive futurism as it trenches upon environmentalism: not
simply a call for action on behalf of the Child,
but the stigmatization of non-reproductive sex
and improperly reproductive bodies.
No Future for You
In positioning eco-activism as agitating on behalf
of generations to come, we may unwittingly participate in the cult of the Child, which is so central
in determining which lives are prioritized, whose
needs are seen to matter, and which bodies are
framed as threatening pollutants or undesirable
side-effects of pollution. What does this mean,
then? Should we throw our lot in with Edelman
and his strategy of refusal? Should we join him
in withdrawing from politics, dismissing it in its
entirety as the terrain of family values? I don’t
think so.
Living for the now and saying ‘fuck the future’
hardly seems like an apt response to impending
ecological disaster – and, indeed, the fact that
49

xenofeminist futurities

Edelman’s analysis largely proceeds via queer
readings of classic Hollywood films suggests that
such crises are not really within his purview. No
Future is not wrestling with the brute reality
of the Capitalocene, so perhaps it is unfair to
frame its arguments in these terms; and yet the
undesirable implications of the text remain. For
one thing, the mantra of ‘no future’ too easily
parallels the neoliberal dogma that there is no
alternative. Edelman’s conflation of politicswith-the-future-with-the-Child does not hold in
every situation: Nina Power notes that ‘the question of a “queer” (that is, non-futural) resistance
to communal relations has in fact been an issue
for various twentieth century political movements. There have been various kinds of “queer”
resistance to the organising principle of heteronormativity, which have at the same time been
explicitly political projects.’23 Power gives the
example of the kibbutz movement – to which we
might add numerous forms of eco-queer theory
and activism.
I would also question Edelman’s position from
the point of view of solidarity with reproductive labourers. Whatever his position on actual
caregivers, it is clear that he has precious little
50

xenofeminist futurities

sympathy with the cultural figure of the Parent.
Take this footnote from his introduction:
‘Narcissism!’ the cry will go up. ‘Who, after all,
[is] more self-denying, more willing to sacrifice,
than a parent? Who more committed to hours of
work without getting paid?’ Not paid? Consult the
ledger book of social approbation. Tax codes, baby
registries, the various forms of parental leave: these,
of course, all pale before the costs of raising a child.
But pro-natalism’s payoff isn’t primarily measured
in dollars or sense. It’s registered in the universal confirmation of one’s standing as an adult and
in the accrual of social capital that allows one a
stake in the only futures market that ever really
counts . . . .24

The resentment is palpable here, even in the
author’s faintly begrudging list of the marginal
financial supports associated with parenthood.
Raising a child may well, for some, bring with it
an influx of social capital to offset financial losses,
as is plainly evident to those who resist the call of
reproductive futurity and are refused access to that
social capital. But one cannot live by social capital alone, and the exhaustion, impoverishment,
51

xenofeminist futurities

and exploitation by white patriarchal capitalism
of many caregivers deserves more than the dismissive treatment meted out here.
Of course, the vaunting of reproduction and the
distribution of social capital are in no way evenly
distributed phenomena. The wealthy, white
‘yummy mummy’ might be applauded for her
contribution to the future of the nation state, but
teenage mothers, black and Latinx parents, trans*
and genderqueer subjects, immigrants, refugees,
and benefits claimants receive no such treatment.
This is painfully apparent in the history of medical abuse in the US, for example, in which black,
Native American, Puerto Rican, and Mexicanorigin migrant people experienced sterilization
abuse in disproportionately high numbers.25 The
same unevenness holds from the point of view of
the child. José Esteban Muñoz notes that ‘In the
same way all queers are not the stealth-universalwhite-gay-man [. . .], all children are not the
privileged white babies to whom contemporary
society caters. [. . .] The future is only the stuff of
some kids. Racialized kids, queer kids, are not the
sovereign princes of futurity.’26 All of this is very
useful in that it prompts us to approach the givers
and receivers of care in a differentiated way. It
52

xenofeminist futurities

demands that we ask new questions: How can
we support those engaged in social reproduction
who do not enjoy even the relatively immaterial safety net of social capital? How can we act
in solidarity with those who are depended upon
by others and who make a huge (and frequently
under-recognized) social and political contribution via their reproductive labour?
Muñoz’s call for utopia is an important
rejoinder to Edelman, and is instructive in the
framework that it offers for thinking ‘queer’ –
not contra the future, but as the unrealized, the
emergent, and the still to come. He declares that
‘Straight time tells us that there is no future but
the here and now of our everyday life. The only
future promised is that of reproductive majoritarian heterosexuality, the spectacle of the state
refurbishing its ranks through overt and subsidized acts of reproduction.’27 Rather than using
this as a basis upon which to reject the future,
however, Muñoz incorporates it into a rallying
call for new and better futures:
It is important not to hand over futurity to normative white reproductive futurity. That dominant
mode of futurity is indeed ‘winning,’ but that is

53

xenofeminist futurities
all the more reason to call on a utopian political
imagination that will enable us to glimpse another
time and place: a ‘not-yet’ where queer youths of
colour actually get to grow up.28

But whilst we can accept that utopia has a
function in galvanizing the political imaginary,
there are still insights from Edelman that we need
to adopt and incorporate. Part of this involves
being explicit about how our discussion of reproductive futurism intersects with ecopolitics and
ideas about the Capitalocene. In acting on behalf
of future generations, we must be careful not to
foster ‘the supreme value of species survival as a
discursive technology of compulsory heterosexuality’.29 As I have suggested, to the extent that
we frame our activism as protecting the earth
for ‘our’ children, we risk promoting restrictive,
exclusionary, and xeno-inhospitable notions of
whose existence counts.
Most obviously, by indirectly privileging lines
of genetic descent and cultural inheritance, such
approaches are distinctly speciesist; neglectful of
the many other forms of life upon which environmental shifts might impact. How, then, can
we think reproduction – even just in the sense
54

xenofeminist futurities

of ensuring the survival of others into the future
– without also reproducing the worst of reproductive futurity? At this point, I would like to
turn to the work of Donna Haraway, who has
done so much over the years in terms of helping
us to view our species within its wider biological and technomaterial context. In recent years,
Haraway has offered us a new slogan for an era
of climate crisis: ‘Make kin not babies!’30 This is
a call to synthesize new solidarities rather than
to privilege genetic family and biological reproduction in a resource-depleted world. It is, quite
clearly, a slogan in two parts: perhaps the easiestto-grasp directive is the suggestion that we, as a
species, should reduce our birth rate.
Biopolitical Border Control
Official UN population projections now suggest
that the number of people inhabiting the planet
will pass the 10 billion mark by the end of the
century, contributing to significant problems
in ‘food availability and affordability’.31 Studies
suggest that this situation may be significantly
exacerbated by environmental crisis, with climate
change resulting in global crop yield losses of up
55

xenofeminist futurities

to 30% by 2080.32 There are fears that the carrying
capacity of particular regions may be exceeded, as
local environments approach the maximal population load that they can support. This would risk
detrimental effects not just on human lives, but
on other species as well – hence Haraway’s suggested check on fertility. ‘Over a couple hundred
years from now,’ she muses, ‘maybe the human
people of this planet can again be numbered two
or three billion or so, while all along the way
being part of increasing wellbeing for diverse
human beings and other critters as means and
not just ends.’33 Whatever challenges a surge in
human numbers might bring, however, population density is but one factor in the complicated
issue of environmental strain.
Any framing of the issue that lets capitalism off
the hook is obviously insufficient and myopic.
Wasteful and unsustainable methods of production, combined with learned habits of commodity
and resource consumption, play a primary role in
eroding the conditions that (quite literally) make
lives liveable. However, whilst I instinctively feel
that the more productive move might be to start
from the systemic effects of surplus value extraction, I can nevertheless recognize the broad logic
56

xenofeminist futurities

behind Haraway’s call to make kin not babies
– at least as far as it extends to the privileged,
disproportionately resource-demanding classes
of the Global North (a point to which I shall
return). How is this call suggestive from an
XF perspective? To the extent to which it foregrounds alternatives to reproductive futurity, the
process of eschewing the deliberate extension of
one’s genetic line – that is, of pollarding one’s
family tree – is intended to help us rethink modes
of intimacy, sociability, and solidarity beyond the
nexus of the nuclear family.
This brings us to the second part of Haraway’s
proposed slogan for the Chthulucene – making
kin. This is the productive moment hitched to
her negation of the current order. She declares
that ‘If there is to be multispecies ecojustice,
which can also embrace diverse human people,
it is high time that feminists exercise leadership
in imagination, theory, and action to unravel
the ties of both genealogy and kin, and kin and
species.’34 In other words, current ecological conditions demand a feminism that practises ‘better
care of kinds-assemblages (not species one at a
time)’,35 and which prompts us to rethink the
existences and relationships that our politics tend
57

xenofeminist futurities

to privilege. ‘Kin’ is the concept that Haraway
mobilizes in an attempt to cultivate this – an
‘assembling sort of word’ that speaks of solidarity beyond reproductive futurism.36 In calling for
the making of kin, rather than the making of
babies, she intends to speak of a less naturalized,
less inward-looking, and less parochial form of
both intra- and inter-species alliance (one that
can be adopted and practised by parents and
non-parents alike).
We desperately need to qualify this rallying
call not to make babies, however. When Edelman
discusses what it means to ‘resist the appeal of
futurity, to refuse the temptation to reproduce’,37
he appears to rather sidestep the fact that biological procreation is not always an expressly planned
or deliberately sought for process. Even if the
provision of abortion was secure and the procedure itself culturally de-stigmatized, it seems
likely that many pregnancies not planned for in
advance would still, for complex and sometimes
personal reasons, be allowed to continue to term.
And of course, who would want to step in to
forcibly prevent people from having children? I
can hardly imagine Haraway advocating for the
imposition of fertility control upon the unwilling
58

xenofeminist futurities

masses! And yet, she could perhaps go further in
disentangling herself from this idea – and, more
particularly, from coercive histories of population
management, extending to racist practices of sterilization ‘as a kind of biopolitical border control,
culling unwanted future lives from citizenship’.38
Indeed, it is important to recognize how
Haraway’s claims for multi-species flourishing
based upon diminished birth rates can be considered ‘symptomatic of a broad re-formulation
of the deadly racial logic of mid-century eugenics’.39 I am not arguing that to de-prioritize the
making of babies is necessarily eugenicist, or
that population should be ‘the third rail of left
political discourse’,40 but I am stressing the need
to overtly and carefully navigate the histories of
colonialist violence that this discussion brings
in its wake. After all, even ‘if universal flourishing is easier to imagine when fewer humans are
in the picture, desiring fewer humans is a terrible starting-point for any politics that hopes to
include, let alone centre, those of us for whom
making babies has often represented a real
form of resistance’.41 As Angela Davis remarks,
we would do well to distinguish between the
‘individual right to birth control’ as a potential
59

xenofeminist futurities

facet of reproductive sovereignty, and ‘the racist
strategy of population control’,42 which has historically marked a profound absence of such
sovereignty.
Haraway does little to explain how her vision
of population control might be made possible
without violating individual bodily autonomy;
her call for a reduction in human numbers seems
curiously weightless, floating free of the entanglements and troubles with which she usually
so doggedly stays. In one of her more recent
texts, much-needed clarifications are added – she
notes that ‘kin making and rebalancing human
numbers’, for example, has to ‘happen in risky
embodied connections to places, corridors, histories, and ongoing decolonial and postcolonial
struggles, and not in the abstract and not by external fiat’.43 Indeed, she points to previous ‘failed
models of population control’ as ‘strong cautionary tales’.44 And yet she still concentrates on a
vision of reproductive futures in which human
births globally are below replacement levels – a
position that seems to begin from an assumed
point beyond the capitalist present, rather than
centring active struggles for a post-capitalist
future. This makes the second part of the slogan,
60

xenofeminist futurities

‘make kin not babies’, a rather cumbersome critical weapon to wield.
When thinking about biological reproduction,
we must not neglect the global operations of social
reproduction that have such a profound influence upon the experiences of caregivers under
capitalism. Rather than advocating for the reduction of human population size, it might be more
appropriate to start from a commitment to acting
in solidarity with the impregnatable and reproductive labourers. This is especially crucial in the
case of those whose access to the social capital of
parenthood is drastically limited – the world’s
displaced, racialized, impoverished, queer, and
otherwise stigmatized subjects. It is crucial, too,
that our futures engage with actually existing
children (as opposed to the culturally inflated
image of the Child that is typically mobilized in
debates about the future).
This is not, to my mind, because of any special status to be awarded to the very young, but
simply one expression of a generalized investment
in, as far as possible, reconstituting refuge for the
precarious and the oppressed. There is reason to
hope, perhaps, that a reorientation away from
reproductive futurity and towards various models
61

xenofeminist futurities

of kinship and xeno-solidarity might actually encourage a deeper hospitality towards the
Other, and that a generalized cultural rejection
of the absolute privilege of the family line might
be framed less as the dismissal of parents and
guardians, and more as an act of solidarity with
new arrivals of all kinds (from migrants, to new
caregivers, to the very young).
Xenofeminist Kin
With this in mind, I would argue that Haraway’s
demand to ‘make kin not babies’ can have utility only under specific and circumscribed
conditions. It must be consciously and carefully
positioned as a call for the fostering of a longterm ideological shift – that is, for an ambitious
attempt to wrest hegemony away from reproductive futurism, and to open up alternative
images of the future founded not solely on the
Child. In this sense, ‘A Cyborg Manifesto’ was
an early expression of the call to make kin. As
María Puig de la Bellacasa reminds us, ‘to avoid
models of solidarity and resistance to domination that would expect us to rely on evident or
given bonding and open ourselves to unexpected
62

xenofeminist futurities

“unnatural” alliances’.45 This is a position very
much shared by Laboria Cuboniks.
The ground for our most productive strategic
coalitions may not travel in our DNA, as transfeminist movements have long been aware. Such
movements have demonstrated the affordances
of xeno-solidarity in the sustained and practical
care they (have been obligated to) offer disenfranchised queer youth, estranged from the only
solidarity network afforded substantial cultural
visibility within the Global North – the family.
Kin making, over and against baby making,
makes sense when understood as a means of prioritizing the generation of new kinds of support
networks, instead of the unthinking replication of
the same. Such a move, expressly conceived of as
a corrective to the lack of variety within (legally,
culturally, politically) recognized and accessible
ideas of kin, is important for a xenofeminist politics. As we put it in the manifesto, ‘the home as
norm has been conflated with home as fact, as
an un-remakeable given’,46 and we must make
it newly possible to conceive of futures beyond
the household, the family, and the Child as we
know them.
This cannot take the form of a punitive disdain
63

xenofeminist futurities

regarding the reproductive choices of others
(which would be against all the nuances of intersectional accounts of reproductive justice), nor
can it take the form of a single-issue campaign for
population control. Instead, it must be grounded
in xeno-hospitality, in the opening up of currently curtailed choices, and in the creation of the
ideological and material infrastructures required
to synthesize new desires as accessible, feasible
choices. This struggle is, of necessity, oriented
towards post-capitalism, for ‘we must engineer an
economy that liberates reproductive labour [. . .],
while building models of familiality free from the
deadening grind of wage labour’.47 Indeed, what
I am describing here might be thought of as a
form of counter-social reproduction – that is, as
social reproduction against the reproduction of the
social as it stands.
Encouragingly, Haraway approaches the
end of Staying with the Trouble via a series of
almost Firestonian images of alternative domestic
arrangements. In a series of speculative, sciencefictional vignettes about one possible future,
she narrates a world in which conventional heterosexual reproduction has been replaced by
post-gender, multi-parent genetic engineering.
64

xenofeminist futurities

In this world, ‘Kin relations can be formed at
any time of life, and so parents and other sorts of
relatives can be added or invented at significant
points of transition.’48 Such imaginaries suggest
a potential process of making babies that is also
a matter of making kin – of bearing children
without bearing the Child or investing in the
social reproduction of white, cishet, patriarchal
values. Perhaps a new variation of Haraway’s
slogan is required here – one which recognizes
that the affective bonds we assemble within and
against capitalism can take various forms, and
need not perpetuate the replication of the same.
‘Xenofam ≥ biofam’ – the idea that families
hospitable to otherness and synthesized across
differences match or exceed those built on genetic
coincidence alone – heads in the right direction,
so long as we add the explicit caveat that so-called
‘blood relations’ can themselves become xenofamilial through an ongoing orientation towards
practical solidarity.
If such a formulation still appears unduly dismissive about the possibilities of some forms of
parental care, we might be forced to reach for
something like ‘xenofam > synofam’, a formulation correctively favouring outward-looking
65

xenofeminist futurities

solidarity with the alien, the foreign, and the
figure of the stranger, over restrictive solidarity
with the familiar, the similar, and the figure of
the compatriot. We must, in a sense, defamiliarize the biological family, whilst refamiliarizing
alternative networks of solidarity and intimacy
in such a way that they can become both generalizable and maximally accessible, without falling
into the trap of reproducing the same. Indeed,
it is worth noting that reproductive futurism
diligently neglects the alternatives to replication
embedded within its procreative imaginary. As
Rebekah Sheldon remarks, ‘it is not just the case
that the child retro-reproductively forecloses the
future but also that the figuration of the child
as the self-similar issue of the present, the safe
space of human prosperity and a return to a manageable nature, forecloses the mutational in the
reproductive’.49 It is, in part, within the mutational that the xeno resides – in the perpetual
possibility that repetition might enable the emergence of difference.
The monumental effort that goes into the
avoidance of such ‘transcription errors’50 – as
expressed in the reproductive futurism of mainstream environmentalism and beyond – reflects
66

xenofeminist futurities

a pervasive cultural awareness that biological
reproduction is, in fact, separable from social
reproduction. Neither the genetic inheritances
nor the carefully orchestrated upbringing of the
embodied child can guarantee smooth generational continuity or exact duplicability. As such,
a distinctive threat ‘emanates from the notion,
inherent in the idea of the future, that tomorrow may not resemble today, that is, that radical
change is not only possible but also continuously
operating within the logic of self-similarity and
as the condition of reproducibility’.51 Building
upon and reorienting the work of Maria Mies,
I would argue that it is here that the productive
‘wildness’ of reproduction must be located – not
in the unpredictability of pregnancy and childbirth or in a refusal of the medical cyborg, but in
the ever-present possibility of disruption against
efforts to ensure replication of the same. Between
one iteration and the next, a space is opened up
whereby the alien may be admitted – hence, perhaps, the widespread aversion to and mistrust of
real children (and their parents) that offsets any
cultural fetishization of the Child.
Mutation is not a process that can be programmed in advance, but rather a phenomenon
67

xenofeminist futurities

that might be encouraged, fostered, or facilitated via the practices of xeno-hospitality – just
as the replication of the same is cultivated via
the elaborate memeplex of reproductive futurity.
Remember, kids: the future is fragile. What I
have been proposing in this chapter is a broader
dissemination of the material bases for means of
survival beyond the nuclear family – for new formations of the socially reproductive unit that can
enable the spread of a different system of values.
This is a model for (re)producing futures without
reproductive futurity, remembering that survival
is the precondition for any revolutionary politics.
I have argued that reproductive futurism should
be considered a problem for those of us with
an interest in eco-activisms – it is a trap that, as
Edelman’s work attests, risks tripping up anyone
trying to think the future.
Much agitation on behalf of the Child – so often
conflated with any world yet to come – tends to
uphold heterosexist ideologies and monogamous
nuclear family structures, as an inadvertent result
of the discursive patterning that shapes our world.
As Power and Muñoz suggest, however, there is
more to the future than reproductive futurity. It
is possible to have a politics beyond the horizon
68

xenofeminist futurities

of the family, and it is possible to have a queer
activism underpinned by the enabling affect of
hope. Indeed, the judicious mobilization of such
a future-oriented affect may be necessary if we
wish to create conditions that are hospitable to
re-engineering what is, for many human and
non-human actors alike, an unbearable present.
In the chapter that follows, I return to the theme
of biological reproduction, not with an eye to
abstract ambitions of population control, nor in
celebration of the great white Child, but as part
of an attempt to theorize what a xenofeminist
technology might look like.

69

3
Xenofeminist Technologies

The conversations we engage in on the futureoriented left ‘too often revolve around the
metaphysically inflated phantom of Technology
as such rather than engaging the specific ways in
which particular technologies are put to use for
certain ends within distinct social assemblages’.1
Against this tendency, this chapter will unpack
the possibilities of a single technological artefact – the Del-Em menstrual extraction device
devised by American feminists in the 1970s. I
want to offer this device as a partial, imperfect,
but hopeful example of what a xenofeminist
technology might look like. Like the gynaecological speculum, the Del-Em is a technology
totemic of second-wave feminist self-help – a
70

xenofeminist technologies

movement based around consciousness raising,
self-education, and interventions in health and
wellbeing.
Patented two years before the 1973 Roe v. Wade
decision liberalized abortion legislation across
the US, the Del-Em is designed to suction the
endometrial lining from a human uterus, using
a syringe and a flexible tube inserted into the
cervix. This process takes minutes to complete,
and was explained by feminists at the time as a
means of regulating menstruation (by condensing
the monthly bleed): ‘rather than menstruating
and cramping for five to seven days, a woman
could have her period removed all at once’.2
Professional physicians ‘expressed concerns about
lay practitioners using the device’,3 but activists
saw menstrual extraction as a means of avoiding
painful and prolonged cramping, as offering convenience and control, and as a tool in countering
a generalized culture of shame around the reproductive body and its fluids.
Crucially, the Del-Em has uses beyond gaining
control of one’s menstrual cycle. It is also a means
of preventing the establishment of early-term
pregnancies, up to seven weeks after a person’s
last monthly period. As such, it is perhaps best
71

xenofeminist technologies

known as a DIY abortion technology. In what
follows, I want to briefly discuss the development
of this device, and to explicitly frame it (and the
social relations surrounding it) as a xenofeminist provocation. First, however, I would like to
provide some broad context to the framing of
reproductive technologies I will offer here.
Specula(tions):
Feminism, Technology, Trouble
The feminist health initiatives of the 1970s
brought together what we might now understand
as an ecofeminist scepticism about the capitalist
(mis)use of technoscience with a qualified and
provisional openness to technologies as genderpolitical tools. Although much feminist health
activism sought to challenge the rise of technologized reproductive medicine, technology in and
of itself was not subject to a blanket rejection.
Instead, much of the effort to seize collective
control from vested industrial interests was built
upon the idea of appropriating established medical tools (the devices of insemination, abortion,
and gynaecological examination, for example).
As Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English
72

xenofeminist technologies

noted in 1973, self-help is ‘an attempt to seize the
technology without buying the ideology’4 – that
is, to disentangle potentially helpful devices from
the contexts in which they are developed and
through which they circulate.
Many of the technologies that were most visibly
seized by second-wave feminists required little in
the way of formalized expertise from their users.
The gynaecological speculum (deployed in vaginal self-exams, in which participants looked at
their genitalia with the help of a hand mirror) is
perhaps the most prominent example. Given the
simplicity of this device, it may not be particularly visible to us as a technology, especially when
considered alongside the cutting-edge biotechnological developments of the time. Haraway, for
example, states that this ‘handcraft tool is inadequate to express our needed body politics in the
negotiation of reality in the practices of cyborg
reproduction’,5 and indeed, we must not lose
sight of the fact that technologies with which we
may be personally unfamiliar nevertheless exert
a profound shaping influence upon our technomaterial worlds. Unlike some feminists from
the 1970s, XF does not dismiss complex tools as
inherently irrecuperable, but agitates for entering
73

xenofeminist technologies

into debates regarding their design, implementation, and alternative affordances.
Self-help alone cannot hope to be a sufficient response to conditions of contemporary
technological sophistication. Yet, given that the
speculum is a tool still regularly used during
routine check-ups (and one which carries a
particular, often unpleasant, affective charge
for those on its receiving end), it represents an
immediate and embodied way into theorizing the
medicalized cyborg. We should embrace ‘multiple icons that reflect the range of technologies the
cyborg confronts on a daily basis’,6 rather than
automatically excluding the speculum and other
relatively simple devices from our understandings
of technological significance. For Terri Kapsalis,
the handcraft tool, as ‘menially mechanical and
prepostmodernist as it may be, is still an integral
part of the pelvic theatre’.7 To dismiss or deemphasize such lo-fi technologies is to neglect the
important ways in which they continue to shape
our experiences of technomateriality.
The tendency to dismiss domesticated devices
– be they older, more familiar tools, or objects specifically associated with the mundane ‘feminine’
– as unworthy of attention radically restricts the
74

xenofeminist technologies

scope of our engagement with technologies, and
encourages us to overlook any ongoing dilemmas
they might pose. There remains important work
to be done in ‘discovering the origins and paths of
development of “women’s sphere” technologies
that seem often to have been considered beneath
notice’.8 In many ways, this chapter seeks to act
as a corrective to this tendency. To be clear, then,
handcraft tools do not represent the full extent of
XF’s horizons; as the text progresses, we will be
drifting towards more overtly cyborgian forms of
bodily intervention. However, I have selected my
case study for its very particular affordances. It
not only allows us to consider how XF’s abstract
theoretical principles might operate within concrete historical circumstances, but also directs
critical attention towards a too often neglected
area of technology.
It is worth noting that Haraway’s account
of the speculum is not entirely dismissive of its
potential as a tool for gender politics, particularly when she positions it within the context of
second-wave self-help. As she notes,
The repossessed speculum, sign of the Women’s
Liberation Movement’s attention to material

75

xenofeminist technologies
instruments in science and technology, was understood to be a self-defining technology. Those
collective sessions with the speculum and mirror
were not only symbols, however. They were selfhelp and self-experimentation practices in a period
in which abortion was still illegal and unsafe. The
self-help groups developed techniques of menstrual
extraction, i.e., early abortion, that could be practiced by women alone or with each other outside
professional medical control.9

The speculum, then, is (at first glance) a relatively
simple technology, allowing people from the
US and elsewhere to perform vaginal self-exams
and generate some sense of their bodily autonomy outside of profit-driven healthcare. Indeed,
this device continues to hold a central place in
cultural imaginaries of feminist empowermentthrough-health up to this day.
The current branding for the Women’s Health
Specialists of California, for example, features
a raised fist clutching a speculum, and similar
imagery appears on the front cover of the 2010
anthology Feminist Technology – a look at how
the design, marketing, and use of particular
objects might render them more or less helpful as
76

xenofeminist technologies

gender-political tools. This choice of cover image
is intriguing, given that specula are only mentioned twice within Feminist Technology – once,
very briefly, as part of a passing comparison, and
a second time as part of a discussion of their
limits as a feminist technology. As one essay in
the volume remarks, cervical screening and other
gynaecological interventions are sometimes ‘not
particularly comfortable, in part because of the
construction of the steel or plastic speculum itself.
A quick patent search reveals that the speculum
has not changed in shape or style much since the
one designed in 1892.’10
Concerningly, the collection has nothing to
say about the processes via which said speculum
came into being – namely, through experimentation upon enslaved Black women. Its inventor,
J. Marion Sims – a nineteenth-century pioneer
of American gynaecological surgery – kept these
women as ‘property in the back of his private
hospital’.11 The speculum was developed in the
context of prolonged experimental abuse, in
which dehumanized test subjects suffered through
multiple invasive procedures and operations
without consent or anaesthesia. Specula, then,
introduce some crucial caveats into the discussion
77

xenofeminist technologies

of xenofeminism’s penchant for appropriating
technologies: such gestures must be attentive to
the intersectional histories and entanglements of
the tools they discuss. Otherwise, we might find
ourselves in the position of uncritically celebrating the tools and products of torture.
Removing Barriers
Aside from the speculum, the technology perhaps most closely associated with the feminist
health movement is the Del-Em – a less widely
recognizable, but nevertheless culturally significant, device for self-help. The Del-Em will
be discussed here not as an isolated device, but
as one key node in a network of interconnecting elements, including activist communities,
healthcare infrastructure, developments in legislation, and transnational practices of care. For
me, the Del-Em is an intriguing proposition
for xenofeminist approaches to technology not
simply because of its affordances for a limited
conception of increased reproductive autonomy
for the impregnatable, but for four other key
reasons: (1) its circumnavigation of gatekeepers; (2) its status as a tool of repurposing; (3) its
78

xenofeminist technologies

immersion in discourses of scalability; and (4) its
potential for intersectional application. In what
remains of this chapter, I’ll address each of these
points in turn.
The American second-wave self-help movement explicitly framed its activities as a means
of restoring bodily autonomy to people who felt
disenfranchised by their interactions with the
medical establishment, and who were excluded
from active decision making regarding their own
care. As Ehrenreich and English put it, ‘When
we demand control over our own bodies, we are
making that demand above all to the medical
system. It is the keeper of the keys.’12 The relationship between the providers and recipients of
professionalized medical care in the 1970s was
both highly gendered and deeply unequal, with
service users ‘dependent on the medical system
for the most basic control over their own reproductivity’.13 This was in the face of the threat
of involuntary tubal ligations, unnecessary hysterectomies, and under-tested or unethically
tested contraceptives.
Initially developing out of the consciousnessraising activities of the second wave, ‘feminist self-help involved women meeting in small
79

xenofeminist technologies

groups, sharing information and stories, educating themselves about their bodies and the medical
establishment, and looking for remedies to minor
bodily problems’.14 Its focus was on developing lay knowledge not only as a means to assert
immediate agency over one’s own body – to more
fully understand its workings – but also as part of
a shareable process of self-enfranchisement and
a first step in agitating for more patient-focused
practices of care. Arguably, however, it is the
movement’s attempts to wrest control away from
the medical establishment for which it is most
famous. This DIY approach spawned initiatives
such as the seminal women’s heath book Our
Bodies, Ourselves (OBOS) – first published in 1971
as the proceedings of a small self-help workshop
that later became the Boston Women’s Health
Book Collective.
The collective faced many barriers to finding
information about gynaecology and the reproductive body; it was often difficult for lay people
to even get into medical libraries, and the writing
process ‘involved the clandestine borrowing of
library cards from bona fide medical students’.15
Much of the material included in the original
edition of OBOS was the result of painstaking
80

xenofeminist technologies

individual research in the face of scant information and resources – the sidestepping of medical
gatekeepers and university librarians alike! Given
the difficulties in obtaining even the most basic
information about human health, the barriers in providing and accessing care beyond the
professionalized medical establishment were
remarkable. This was particularly the case when
it came to procedures widely restricted by legislation. It was radical enough to include a chapter
on abortion in OBOS (considering its publication two years before Roe v. Wade), but the need
to widen actual access to abortion in the early
seventies was particularly pressing.
The feminist response to this was to set up
abortion counselling and referral services, such
as Jane in Chicago. Originally established as one
of a number of networks in the US intended to
connect people with so-called ‘backstreet abortionists’, the group’s activities later took a quite
distinctive turn:
At first the women in Jane concentrated on screening abortionists, attempting to determine which
ones were competent and reliable. But they quickly
realized that as long as women were dependent

81

xenofeminist technologies
on illegal practitioners, they would be virtually
helpless. Jane determined to take control of the
abortion process so that women who turned to Jane
could have control as well. Eventually, the group
found a doctor who was willing to work closely
with them. When they discovered that he was not,
as he claimed to be, a physician, the women in Jane
took a bold step: ‘If he can do it, then we can do
it, too.’ Soon Jane members learned from him the
technical skills necessary to perform abortions.16

Through witnessing and assisting with the
performance of abortions beyond a professionalized clinical environment, members of Jane
developed a new understanding of and attitude
towards the procedure: ‘The techniques were very
straightforward. [. . .] They were skills that, with
practice and care’, any lay person could learn.17
With abortion thus demythologized, members
of the service came to the conclusion that ‘the
barriers that the medical establishment erected
between patient and practitioner were not a function of either a woman’s needs or the needs of
the situation’.18 Instead, they were a function of
disciplinary power and a means of hoarding both
institutional authority and useful knowledge.
82

xenofeminist technologies

The group set itself a mission to further feminist reproductive sovereignty by making service
users active participants in their own care – a
process intended to denaturalize the condescending treatment that many received at the hands of
doctors. Initially and primarily, Jane relied upon
dilation and curettage abortions – a procedure in
which the cervix is opened and the contents of
the uterus are scraped out. Later, however, some
members switched to a manual aspiration model
using cannulas and syringes, which they learned
about via the inventors of the Del-Em. Whilst
Jane used methods related to menstrual extraction, rather than deploying the Del-Em itself, the
accounts of those involved with the service remain
useful to us for their critical engagement with
medical instruments. Laura Kaplan organizes
much of her history of Jane around the necessity of gaining ‘access to the tools and skills to
affect the conditions’ of technomaterial existence
– that is, she frames the circumnavigation of
gatekeepers as a process of seizing technologies.19
Again, we see that the development and appropriation of technology was a crucial part of the
feminist movement’s efforts to challenge medical
sexism and profiteering.
83

xenofeminist technologies

The Del-Em itself, as a technology designed by
feminists to route around the juridical and medical restrictions upon access to abortion, demands
to be seen in just these terms. In this case, there
is another level to the general tendency towards
free information exchange and the bypassing of
gatekeepers. The Del-Em arguably represents an
engagement with the principles of free and open
source design as a means of ensuring the equitable
dissemination of tools and technologies. Whilst
the device was patented by its original designer
(Lorraine Rothman), it was always intended to
circulate in a free and non-commoditized fashion. The formal turn to intellectual property was
not about securing individualized ownership of
menstrual extraction and its instruments, but was
in fact a concerted attempt to ensure that the
Del-Em would remain freely available, protected,
and shareable amongst those who might need it.
This is important when contextualizing the
emergence of the device, which was designed in
California during the 1970s – a time and space
associated with considerable innovation in
software development. The emphasis on shareability associated with self-help in general, and
with menstrual extraction in particular, can be
84

xenofeminist technologies

thought of as ‘analogous to modes of shared and
circulated production that gave birth to software such as UNIX, and later LINUX, as well
as the open-source patent’20 – developments
which some contemporary commentators see as
suggestive of the rise of a new economy of contribution, grounded upon participatory knowledge
exchange. An emerging interest in free and open
source design and dissemination was characteristic of the Del-Em’s historical moment. In its
commitment to non-market mechanisms, and
its focus on information sharing and voluntary
cooperation, the feminist self-help movement
arguably demonstrates an ethos akin to that of
what we now call the Creative Commons; this
was one key prong of feminist efforts to work
around oppressive pathways of healthcare.
The xenofeminist manifesto touches upon
the link between medical technologies and free
and open source platforms in a different context – namely, healthcare for trans* people in
the twenty-first century. Paul B. Preciado is
amongst those who have discussed the bypassing
of gatekeepers within trans* communities. His
ground-breaking book Testo Junkie: Sex, Drugs,
and Biopolitics in the Pharmacopornographic Era
85

xenofeminist technologies

describes his self-experimentation with Testogel
– a synthetic androgen administered through the
skin. As he remarks, whilst some people choose
to use the drug ‘as part of a protocol to change
sex’, others are ‘self-medicating without trying
to change their gender legally or going through
any psychiatric follow-up’.21 Preciado positions
himself within this latter camp, taking testosterone outside of the narrowly defined territories
of its institutionally sanctioned usage. He is
not taking it with the permission of doctors in
order to transition from ‘female’ to ‘male’; he is
illicitly self-administering it, appropriating and
repurposing specific molecules in an act of autoexperimentation without preconceived goals or
ideal outcomes.
The decision to not seek an official diagnosis is
in part a refusal to submit to the policing gaze of
medical and juridical authorities. As Joshua Rivas
observes in his engagement with Testo Junkie:
Before a transgender individual can generally be
prescribed a course of hormone replacement therapy (and in France have its associated costs covered
by social security), the trans-person must first meet
certain minimum eligibility criteria set forth in the

86

xenofeminist technologies
Harry Benjamin International Gender Dysphoria
Association’s Standards of Care, including diagnosis
with a gender identity disorder by a mental health
professional or physician. Preciado in this way situates herself [sic] within a biopolitically constructed
space of clandestinity and non-recognition . . . .22

Some commentators see this dynamic as characteristic of wider tensions between trans*
communities and disciplinary powers in the
Global North, arguing that trans* people ‘seek
access to surgical, hormonal and psychotherapeutic treatments, but seek to avoid pathologisation
and stigmatisation – this is a defining characteristic, perhaps the central dilemma, of their
relationship with clinicians’.23 This dilemma is
one reason why some people with the means to do
so might choose to sidestep an official diagnosis as
a means of accessing treatments and technologies.
As with feminist self-help in the 1970s, a fractious
relationship with healthcare infrastructures drives
people to find different ways of accessing care,
often tied to self-experimentation within politicized support networks.
The grasp of gatekeepers upon both knowledges and technologies has loosened significantly
87

xenofeminist technologies

in recent years, however, as reflected by clinical guidelines. The Royal College of Psychiatrists
notes that ‘Hormones and hormone-blockers are
readily available via the internet. The medical
practitioner or specialist must consider the risks
of harm to the patient by not prescribing hormones in these circumstances.’24 The guidance,
therefore, is that GPs or other non-specialist
medical practitioners ‘prescribe “bridging” endocrine treatments as part of a holding and harm
reduction strategy while the patient awaits specialised endocrinology or other gender identity
treatment’.25 We can see that having alternative
means of accessing information, peer support,
and pharmaceuticals has forced profound changes
in the way the medical establishment conceives of
treatment. This represents a new means of resisting those institutions that have historically fought
to restabilize the disciplinary grid of gender in
the face of biotechnical innovations that might
unsettle it.
By taking testosterone in an unsanctioned
fashion, Preciado uses technical intervention
within and upon the body as a means of contesting the pharmacopornographic regime
that constitutes him. He expresses this quite
88

xenofeminist technologies

forcefully at times, insisting that ‘your body,
the body of the multitude and the pharmacopornographic networks that constitute them are
political laboratories, both effects of the process
of subjection and control and potential spaces for
political agency and critical resistance to normalization’.26 In a move that clearly resonates with
self-help’s privileging of the lay healer, Preciado
explicitly frames auto-experimental engagements
with embodiment as part of a tradition of radical
amateurism. This is associated particularly with
herbalists, midwives, and witches – practitioners
who were deliberately excluded from medicine in
order to enable its simultaneous professionalization and masculinization. Preciado claims that
the coming of modernity involved a widespread
‘process of eradicating knowledge and lower-class
power while simultaneously working to reinforce
the hegemonic knowledge of the expert, something indispensable to the gradual insertion of
capitalism on a global scale’.27 Networked communication technologies, however, have made
it increasingly difficult to continue stockpiling
knowledge in exclusionary ways.
Interestingly for our purposes, Preciado frames
his institutionally illegitimate relationship with
89

xenofeminist technologies

Testogel in language more generally associated
with digitality and the Creative Commons. He
throws in his lot with ‘gender hackers’ – a community of ‘copyleft users who consider sex hormones
free and open biocodes, whose use shouldn’t be
regulated by the state or commandeered by pharmaceutical companies’.28 The means by which
biotechnologies and information can circulate in
the digital age has, XF argues, been ‘instrumental
in wresting control of the hormonal economy
away from “gatekeeping” institutions seeking to
mitigate threats to established distributions of
the sexual’.29 This includes ‘the hydra of black
market pharmacies’ that have been made accessible in the digital age, as well as the dissemination
of ‘endocrinological knowhow’ amongst online
communities – phenomena in part buoyed by
increasingly visible developments in cryptocurrency and darknet marketplaces.30
The rise of the internet, in other words, has
brought with it new opportunities for people to
route around juridical and medical institutions,
and thereby to refuse (to a certain extent) limiting and unhelpful forms of pathologization.
However, the xenofeminist manifesto articulates
a dissatisfaction with the limited alternatives
90

xenofeminist technologies

provided by illicit online commerce – not least
because of the potential for unregulated pharmacies to sell inefficacious counterfeit medication,
drugs that have been improperly stored, and so
on. In a further point of crossover with the ethos
of the Creative Commons, we write that
To trade in the rule of bureaucrats for the market
is, however, not a victory in itself. These tides need
to rise higher. We ask whether the idiom of ‘gender
hacking’ is extensible into a long-range strategy, a
strategy for wetware akin to what hacker culture has
already done for software. [. . .] Without the foolhardy endangerment of lives, can we stitch together
the embryonic promises held before us by pharmaceutical 3D printing (‘Reactionware’), grassroots
telemedical abortion clinics, gender hacktivist and
DIY-HRT forums, and so on, to assemble a platform for free and open source medicine?31

In looking to these sites, we are acknowledging glimmering moments of opportunity within
what is, in many ways, a restrictive and conservative online landscape. In pointing to these limited
affordances, I would argue that we are also engaging with the legacy of the Del-Em.
91

xenofeminist technologies

It may seem perverse to contextualize contemporary trans* practices and activisms in terms of
a second-wave feminist movement not known
for its hospitability to anybody but cis women –
and white, middle-class, First World, cis women
at that. Even twenty-first-century accounts of
seventies self-help typically fail to address its
implicit exclusion of Othered bodies. It is rare
that the important implications of the movement
for trans*, non-binary, intersex, or gendernonconforming people are considered, despite
this being one of its most interesting legacies.
How can our transfeminist practice negotiate these falsely universalizing tendencies? How
can the Del-Em be an example of a xenofeminist technology, given the seeming invisibility of
trans* (non-)reproductive bodies within the context from which it emerged?
This is an issue to which we will return later
in the chapter. For now, however, we can simply
note that XF is engaged in an uneasy entanglement with the self-help movement. For this
entanglement to be productive, we will need
enter into a process of active repurposing – a process one might characterize as using old means
for new ends. All acts of repurposing represent a
92

xenofeminist technologies

kind of reclaiming or redirection of past activities, and this chapter’s specific use of examples
drawn from second-wave feminism demands
a reorientation of the movement towards new
ends, a concerted extension of its goals, and a
strategic appropriation of its tools.
(Re)purposeful Activity
Bringing the second-wave feminist health movement and its ‘handcraft tools’ into conversation
with more recent developments in digital culture may seem like a stretch. However, I am not
the first author to identify self-help as a resource
for thinking about networked communication
in the twenty-first century. Alexandra Samuel,
for example, looks to menstrual extraction not
as a point of synergy with open source software,
but as a model for alternative telecommunications networks during states of emergency. More
specifically, she considers the importance of grassroots self-reliance in an era in which the internet
(as a vital system of memory and know-how) has
become an essential survival tool.
Samuel notes that, in times of crisis, ‘our ability
to reach emergency responders, access life-saving
93

xenofeminist technologies

information, and track down our friends and
family largely depend on our ability to place a call
or connect to the Internet. In a disaster, that connectivity can be one of the first things to go.’32
Being post-millennial cyborgs, our capacity to
act is largely tethered to the everyday informational infrastructures with which we engage. As
such, we may find ourselves in need of alternative communicational technologies in the event
of a crisis – this includes everything from basic
ham radios to decentralized networks assembled
through interconnecting ‘Internet of Things’
devices. Indeed, such networks would be valuable not only in emergency situations in which
communications infrastructure is brought down,
but also in cases of state censorship, inequitable access to the internet, and other barriers to
the free flow of information. We might consider
the shutting down of peer-to-peer filesharing or
whistleblowing sites here, as well as situations of
civil uprising.33
Samuel remarks that ‘we should radically
expand the number of people who have the
technical know-how, hardware, and emergency
power to set up and sustain a peer-to-peer mesh
network. [. . .] The hardware and power required
94

xenofeminist technologies

to keep a network node running are not monumental, and the tech know-how required, while
significant, is within reach of anyone who can
follow written instructions.’34 The most urgent
requirement, as far as she is concerned, is an
appropriate bottom-up movement centred
on self-equipping via knowledge exchange – a
movement that teaches the widest possible range
of people how to bypass official channels, given
that maximum participation facilitates more
robust mesh networks. Whilst this focus on
defensiveness is arguably somewhat at odds with
tendencies in the xenofeminist manifesto (a point
to which we shall return in due course), Samuel’s
discussion nevertheless chimes with our analysis by explicitly extending to the feminist health
movement of the 1970s.
Menstrual extraction is positioned here as a
model of, and a precedent for, ‘a long-standing,
decentralized campaign that disseminated complex technical skills to a wide range of would-be
self-helpers’.35 The argument brings the knowledge practices of self-help – including its assembly
and use of the Del-Em – into conversation
with the contemporary need to extend technical literacy regarding alternative communication
95

xenofeminist technologies

infrastructures: ‘The example of menstrual extraction proves that it is possible to disseminate both
the gear and expertise required for a moderately
challenging form of self-help. What it takes is
a small community of committed, knowledgeable people who are ready to teach, and a larger
community of people who see the value in learning.’36 Whilst Samuel’s argument concentrates
on the DIY element of this strand of American
second-wave activism – its capacity to sidestep
gatekeepers, discussed above – it also touches
upon the second of my four trajectories for XF
technologies. It is an example of repurposing.
In the case of peer-to-peer mesh networks, it is
mundane, ‘battery-powered, Bluetooth-enabled
gadgets’ that are strategically appropriated.37 By
turning these devices towards purposes other than
those for which they were primarily designed,
a network can be created that, by linking to
other local networks, forms a wider assemblage
of connection.
This vision of a grassroots movement for
technical literacy, then, is partially driven by
ideas about reusing and repurposing accessible
resources in as effective a way as possible. The
Del-Em is certainly an example of that. Indeed,
96

xenofeminist technologies

strategic appropriation of this kind is important
to consider when discussing potential points of
confluence between menstrual extraction and
the xenofeminist project. In the manifesto, we
question why there has been so ‘little explicit,
organized effort to repurpose technologies for
progressive gender political ends’, and advocate for the strategic redeployment of ‘existing
technologies to re-engineer the world’.38 At this
point, it may be worth noting that sociotechnical
developments in general can be conceived of as
a form of repurposing, in that they turn extant
materials towards alternative uses; this is simply
the flipside of the truism that every possible transformation emerges from existing conditions and
is constrained by the materials at hand. However,
there is a more specific point to be made here.
In a recent interview, my Laboria Cuboniks
collaborator Lucca Fraser was asked whether she
thought the master’s tools could ever dismantle
the master’s house. Her response was emphatic:
Yes. Both literally and figuratively yes. That’s what
tools are – they’ve got uses that go beyond their
masters’ intentions. And they’ve got weaknesses
that can be exploited to make them do things they

97

xenofeminist technologies
weren’t intended to do. Which is basically what
hacking means. This doesn’t mean we shouldn’t
invent new tools. The more the better. But yes,
absolutely, the master’s tools can dismantle the
master’s house.39

Not only can we draw upon existing resources
to develop better tools, then, but we can also
draw upon existing tools to pursue better, more
emancipatory outcomes. These comments clearly
chime with my characterization of repurposing as
using old means for new ends, and resonate with
much of my conception of menstrual extraction
technologies. The Del-Em, in many ways, seeks
to enact something like a xenofeminist project of
repurposing, and gives concrete form to abstract
discussions about disobedient tools.
The most obvious sense in which it achieves
this is through the process of its material construction. Rather than being purchasable as a
complete, ready-made object, the expectation
was that auto-experimental self-help practitioners would build the device themselves, perhaps
by repurposing everyday artefacts from their own
homes – aquarium piping; a mason jar of ‘the
kind used for home canning’; the plastic tube
98

xenofeminist technologies

from a can of hairspray; and so on.40 As with
mesh networks, we see that this pragmatic seizure of elements from the mundane technosocial
world is closely connected to the project of circumventing gatekeepers.
For its designers, the Del-Em
held the promise that women might learn to safely
perform this procedure on each other, making it
almost impossible for the state to enforce restrictive
laws. It was important to Rothman and her allies
that other women who had no prospect of medical abortion – such as in prisons – could build her
device with parts found at grocery, hardware, and
pet stores.41

Beyond this clever redeployment of workaday
objects, however, the device as a whole can be
thought of as repurposeful, given the history of its
emergence. The Del-Em was inspired by the portable equipment used by a number of backstreet
abortionists, with Rothman’s patent adding only
a valve, some tubing, and a collection jar to the
existing design.42 These illicit, twentieth-century
practitioners needed efficient tools that were maximally safe to use outside of a clinical setting. The
99

xenofeminist technologies

feminist self-help movement shared these needs,
but sought to make the technology further accessible; it wanted to eradicate the trauma of having
to seek out covert procedures, and to secure the
device’s status as non-commercial.
In the case of the Del-Em, a technology
originally designed to make a profit from the suffering of the unwillingly pregnant was tweaked,
patented, and used for explicitly feminist aims.
Underground abortion in the US is by no means
the starting point of the Del-Em’s travels, however, and nor is it the first link in its chain of
appropriations. The device is actually the result
of (and a contribution to) an ongoing transnational history of reproductive politics, population
control, and tussles around bodily sovereignty.
An increased state interest in family planning in
China before the Cultural Revolution is one key
branch of the Del-Em’s genealogy, for example.
This was a period of intensified research into new
methods of abortion, as techniques were envisioned that might prove efficient in rural areas
of the country, including a negative pressure
bottle method of aspiration that ‘used a glass
bottle heated with a match to create a vacuum,
and hence did not require electricity to create
100

xenofeminist technologies

suction’.43 Given that this device was especially
designed to circulate outside of clinical settings –
and thus for use by people other than doctors – it
was of particular interest to some American prochoice feminists before Roe v. Wade.
According to Michelle Murphy,
images of this technology clipped from a Chinese
nursing journal article circulated among East Coast
radical feminists in the late 1960s, repoliticized as
a possible means of providing abortions without
medical involvement [. . .] . Thus, the itinerary of
the device begins not with a movement from the
West to elsewhere, but from the so-called communist third world to a Western imperial centre.44

Such processes of transnational knowledge
exchange were not uncommon within the feminist health movement. OBOS, for example,
travelled widely after its initial publication, but
rarely arrived at its destinations unchanged. The
text’s various translators – often local activist
groups – ‘invariably participated in a collective
process of contextualizing and critically reworking the US text’.45 Such reworkings often directly
confronted difference, rather than skimming over
101

xenofeminist technologies

potential conflicts, in order to ‘open up controversial topics, celebrate local accomplishments, or
suggest points for political coalitions’.46
As with technical knowledge about abortion, this process of selective appropriation and
recontextualization was not simply a matter of
ideas being disseminated from North America
outwards: ‘its flows were not unidirectional. The
text not only moved from place to place, but its
translations travelled as well, providing the basis
for new translations or returning – literally – to
the United States, where they were taken up and
used by diasporic communities.’47 Such processes
led to the US edition of the text being revised,
extended, and qualified in response to the perspectives of those who saw fit to challenge it. This
may in itself be considered a form of critical feminist repurposing. After all, we have seen that acts
of strategic, technomaterial appropriation can
take various forms – the utilization of intellectual
property law to protect a technology’s free circulation; the exploitation or reassembly of existing
objects for unexpected purposes; the modification
of reproductive technologies in order to extend
bodily autonomy or foreground feminist values.
So far in this chapter, I have used the Del-Em to
102

xenofeminist technologies

explore and develop two key principles of XF: (1)
the circumnavigation of gatekeepers; and (2) processes of repurposing. In the section that follows,
I will consider what insights might be gleaned
regarding scalability.
The Scale of the Problem
Menstrual extraction took the individualized
solution of illegal abortion, and reimagined
it as a political solution, focused around communities of feminists carving out their own
spaces of reproductive sovereignty. The role of
this communal process was significant for the
self-help movement – both as a physical necessity, given that ‘it wasn’t possible for a woman
to insert the tubing by herself’,48 and as itself
a form of feminist consciousness-raising technology. Indeed, this is arguably what sets the
Del-Em apart from other, related efforts at fertility control in the 1970s. During this period,
various procedures were coming into existence
for manually evacuating the content of the
uterus via vacuum aspiration – not just those of
backstreet abortionists, but also those of more or
less state-tolerated practitioners in countries like
103

xenofeminist technologies

Bangladesh. One thing that clearly differentiated
the Del-Em from these other projects was the
collectivized, politicized contexts in which it was
deployed. This brings me to another element of
this technology that resonates with xenofeminist
interests: its scalability.
Self-help, menstrual extraction, and the
Del-Em all demand to be seen as primarily local
interventions. Whilst they have considerable
implications for individual reproductive autonomy and shifts in subjectivity, there are obvious
material limits to what self-help can achieve on
its own. As Ehrenreich and English remarked at
the time,
It could expand far beyond self-examination to
include lay (though not untrained) treatment for
many common problems – lay prenatal and delivery assistance, lay abortions, and so on. But if our
imaginations are unlimited, our resources are limited. If we are concerned with the care of all women
– and not just those with the leisure for self-help
enterprises – for all their problems – and not just
the uncomplicated disorders of youth – then we
are once again up against the medical system with
its complex and expensive technology.49

104

xenofeminist technologies

Ultimately, a knowledge of one’s own body and
its processes can take one only so far. At a certain
point, reliance upon wider healthcare infrastructure will resurface. After all, to ‘secede from or
disavow capitalist machinery will not make it disappear. Likewise, [. . .] the call to slow down and
scale back is a possibility available only to the
few.’50 Such comments apply as much to selfhelp as they do to anarcho-localist visions of the
commune. Withdrawal is largely possible only for
the ‘healthy’ – with health understood as a differentially distributed privilege, generative of other
privileges, the experience of which is inevitably
shaped by structural oppressions or advantages.
An example from routine healthcare practices
illustrates this point. Cervical screening is a regular experience for many people in high-income
economies (although the distribution of both
preventive screening and reactive care remains
disturbingly uneven). The smear test was first
introduced as a routine screening technique in
the US in the 1940s. At this time, the inventor
of the Pap smear raised the possibility of subjects self-collecting cells from their own cervixes,
advising that to do so would not affect a sample’s
quality. However, ‘the profession of gynaecology
105

xenofeminist technologies

was reluctant to give authority over the smear to
women themselves, instead absorbing the smear
as a key practice within a reorientation of gynaecology that [. . .] brought increasing numbers of
women under its care’.51 Given its relative simplicity and its ties to disciplinary power, then, the
cervical smear test represents particularly fertile
territory for feminist self-help.
Several second-wave collectives and feminist
health centres did indeed take an interest in Pap
smears – Jane, for example, extended its remit to
include cervical screening in around 1971. Upon
realizing that many of the people it was serving
were reliant upon welfare or a minimum-wage
income, the largely white and middle-class group
decided to provide additional basic gynaecological services. The illegal abortionist its members
were learning from donated a teaching microscope, and from that point onwards, Jane began
offering all of its service users a free Pap smear.52
Whilst this may seem like a clear example of
self-help successfully enacting some of its own
key tenets, there were limits to what could be
achieved in this informal context.
Kaplan remarks that, although Jane members ‘stained the slides [. . .] they didn’t have the
106

xenofeminist technologies

expertise to recognize differences in cell structure’.53 This eventually led the network to partner
with a professional laboratory; the ‘total cost to
the group for each Pap smear, including materials
and lab charges, was under $4’.54 Despite the low
cost, however, the ‘movement of the Pap smear
from participatory clinic to lab drew the limits of
feminist self-help’s scale of action’.55 The reliance
upon conventional healthcare infrastructure,
even in the case of a relatively simple procedure,
indicates that totally autonomous medical care is
nearly impossible to maintain in an era of increasingly complex biotechnological entanglement.
Despite these limits, however, the discourse
surrounding the Del-Em still provides a productive (though partial) model for a xenofeminist
politics of scale. That is to say, it offers practical
guidance in terms of how ‘a mobile and intricate
network of transits’ might be facilitated between
the micro- and the macropolitical levels of emancipatory feminist politics.56 This is because the
development of the Del-Em as a technology
was accompanied by the development of menstrual extraction as a collective process; concerted
efforts were made to ensure that it could circulate
beyond the atomized emptying uterus. Indeed,
107

xenofeminist technologies

Murphy argues that the activists involved in the
dissemination of the Del-Em were engaged in
‘a kind of protocol feminism – a form of feminism concerned with recrafting and distribution
of technosocial practices by which the care and
study of sexed living-being could be conducted’.57
Such a formulation strikes me as rich and stimulating, but how are we to understand the concept
of protocol in this context? What does feminism
have to gain from being appended to it?
The work of Alexander Galloway and Eugene
Thacker may offer some insight here. In The
Exploit, they argue that the concept of protocol
can be defined as ‘a horizontal, distributed control apparatus that guides both the technical and
political formation of computer networks, biological systems, and other media’.58 The protocol,
in other words, is understood as a decentralized
means via which to guide the formation of various
networks – an ‘apparatus of organization’ with
implications far beyond conventional information technologies.59 Indeed, I would argue that
the protocol as a social or political technology has
greater resonance with the current discussion than
does the protocol in its merely technical sense (as
in hypertext transfer protocols and so on).
108

xenofeminist technologies

Galloway and Thacker outline several key
characteristics of protocol, but I wish to concentrate on the three I consider most immediately
relevant for the articulation of protocol (xeno)
feminism:
1 Protocols are relational. They ‘emerge through
the complex relationships between autonomous, interconnected agents’.60
2 Protocols are adaptive. In order to ‘function
smoothly, protocological networks must be
robust and flexible; they must accommodate a high degree of contingency through
interoperable and heterogeneous material
interfaces’.61
3 Protocols are organizational. They can be
understood as an ‘emergent property of
organization and control in networks that
are radically horizontal and distributed’.62 As
such, they represent the exercise of influence
upon decentralized networks.
The affordances of such a conception of protocol for XF understandings of reproductive
sovereignty may not be immediately obvious.
If ‘protocol is a materialized functioning of
109

xenofeminist technologies

distributed control’,63 then it would seem to be a
particularly volatile tool for emancipatory gender
politics, given that the meaning of a specific protocol will depend upon what, precisely, is being
controlled in a given situation. Its object, along
with its circumstances of enactment, will inevitably shape its resonances and feminist utility.
But as much as the protocol might represent a
pervasive and equivocal means of control within
network societies, it is nevertheless a tool to be
annexed. Protocol logic can be repurposed and
put to other ends – something Galloway and
Thacker make clear in their discussion of ‘counterprotocols’.64 The ‘first step in realizing an
ethics and a politics of networks’, they argue,
is ‘an activation of a political consciousness that
is as capable of the critiquing of protocological
control as it is capable of fostering the transformative elements of protocol’.65 Fostering these
transformative elements is one potential strut of
a xenofeminist project – and crucially, as we shall
see, may facilitate a better understanding of the
concrete politics of scale. Let us further pursue
this point by returning to our central case study.
The protocols around menstrual extraction –
including where the procedure should take place,
110

xenofeminist technologies

in what style and format information was communicated, and the level of involvement of the
person undergoing the procedure – were laid
out by the device’s developers and by various
local groups. As protocols, these guidelines were
intended to be transmissible, and encouraged
what feminist health activists believed to be best
practice. This typically involved people narrating
their experiences of the procedure and inserting
their own specula, for example, and encouraged
the framing of menstrual extraction as a group
experience – a technique learned and performed
among solidarity networks taking ownership of
their collective health by experimenting on one
another. This notion of the personal network was
particularly important given the sensitive legal
situation at the time.
Groups practising self-help (including menstrual extraction) ‘were legally harassed, so most
operated more or less underground’.66 During
that rather over-heated historical moment, the
establishment of close-knit feminist collectives
worked to reduce the risk of exposure, whilst the
protocol permitted both practical instructions
and political principles to flow beyond specific
collectives with relative ease and safety. It was not
111

xenofeminist technologies

simply that guidelines for procedural behaviours
facilitated the preservation of closed networks
and therefore reduced the risk of legal consequences. Crucially, these guidelines also allowed
the self-help movement to reach beyond its initial instantiations and to enter new territories.
Key ideas could be disseminated and passed on
without quashing situational differences, thereby
enabling self-help to exceed its various local
contexts.
After all, as Galloway and Thacker remark, the
protocol represents a bridge between autonomous
agents, and, as such, speaks to the possibility of
translocal operations. Its qualities of both relationality and adaptability help to ensure its
pronounced capacity for transmissibility. As with
memes, pliability enables transmission: the protocol can evolve to suit specific contexts, whilst
retaining sufficient determining characteristics to
remain more or less recognizably itself. A given
protocol can therefore feasibly preserve a great
deal of its influential and organizational capacity,
both through and despite its potential mobility.
The protocol, as we have conceived of it here,
is the tractable and vigorous directional force
within an open system, and a tool for training
112

xenofeminist technologies

order ‘to emerge as an “invisible hand’” from
apparent spontaneity’.67 Menstrual extraction’s
protocols (like OBOS) could be made subject to
strategic appropriation via recontextualization.
In this sense, the modifiable community norms
surrounding its use can be seen as another example of the Del-Em’s (re)purposeful activities. This
returns us to the question of scale.
Murphy claims that menstrual extraction, as
practised by members of the second-wave feminist self-help health movement, was ‘a biopolitical
project simultaneously on a microscale and macroscale. The microbiopolitical effort sought to
technically create individualized control over
the sexed reproductive body, while the macrobiopolitical register was traced by the flexible,
universalizable, and mobile features of a protocol
intended to bind and circulate among women in
aggregate anywhere and everywhere.’68 The protocol itself was designed as a way of transiting
between these two scales of political intent, the
local and the global. This focus on scalability – on
strategies for rolling out and transmitting political ideas via the protocol – offers an insight into
how feminist activisms of the period attempted,
however imperfectly, to engage with what I have
113

xenofeminist technologies

elsewhere called the mesopolitical.69 The mesopolitical operates between atomized, hyper-local
interventions at the level of, for example, individual embodiment (micropolitics), on the one
hand, and big-picture, speculative projects premised on the wholesale overthrowal of power at the
level of the state or beyond (macropolitics), on
the other.
Both of these tendencies – which dominate
many elements of leftist discourse – can seem
oblivious to material conditions on the ground
and disinterested in identifying viable pathways
to change. The mesopolitical is neglected within
academic political philosophizing in part because
it is so difficult to theorize outside of its concrete
materializations. It is lived, situational, perpetually negotiated, and difficult to distil down to
abstract principles; this is the scale of the everyday
reproductive labour of the left. In the abstract,
it can perhaps be characterized by a handful
of rather broad principles – capacity building
and outward-looking praxis; an appreciation of
the transversality of oppression; solidarity with
the emancipatory self-directed organizing of
others; and a willingness to engage with ‘rhizomatic connections among [. . .] resistances and
114

xenofeminist technologies

insubordinations’.70 Without sufficient attention to the mesopolitical, the difficult work of
alliance building and of increasing the reach of
political ideas is too often left unconsidered. It is
within this context that the example of self-help
becomes particularly illuminating, given that the
protocol might be considered a specifically mesopolitical tactic.
But even as we consider what the protocol
might offer us, and how it could be appropriated
as a pragmatic move for scaling up our own gender-political projects, we must remain attentive
to its limitations. As with many other valuable
emancipatory interventions, it is not sufficient in
and of itself – something that those within the
self-help movement, not to mention their critics,
were quick to recognize. The actual applications
of the Del-Em, along with the protocols surrounding its use, were just one node in a wider
network of efforts for long-term transformation
that emerged through the movement. Several
of these efforts produced particularly tenacious
forms of change which proved difficult for opposing forces to disembed. For example, activists
(including Rothman) made efforts to ‘establish
a new medical infrastructure’.71 This involved
115

xenofeminist technologies

not only working to establish discrete healthcare facilities across California, but also efforts
to spread the project into new areas. Throughout
the 1970s, the founders of the self-help movement contributed to a National Federation of
Feminist Women’s Health Centers, which linked
up feminist organizations across the US in the
hopes of securing further gains for reproductive
sovereignty and bodily autonomy.
Elsewhere, feminist action for health utilized an ecology of activisms to simultaneously
facilitate change at multiple sites and scales.
Whilst Jane might be seen as having practised
a sticking-plaster approach to managing individual reproductive crisis – taking action that
‘might help a few women but did not further
or reflect the social changes’ other feminist
organizations envisioned72 – it also informally
affiliated with different groups to push for legislative change. Jane cooperated with the Clergy
Consultation Service on Abortion, for example
– a Baptist group that not only offered a referral
service, but worked ‘overtly for legalized abortion and educate[d] people about the issue. Their
cloak of moral authority allowed them to take
a public stand’ when other groups could not.73
116

xenofeminist technologies

These examples point to the various strata of the
mesopolitical: from protocols within and across
closed groups, to the formalizing of these protocols via public-facing facilities, to the federalizing
of these same facilities, to coalition and cooperation with distinct organizations. All of these
political technologies have potential tactical value
in terms of building a broad-based, issue-driven
movement, and the legislative and infrastructural
gains that pro-choice feminist health activism
fostered in the seventies have enjoyed both reach
and longevity, even in the face of repeated challenges from the religious right.74
Despite evidence of an attentiveness to scalability, however, many of the forms of activism
we have been discussing in this chapter remain
markedly restricted in terms of their scope and
ambition. I am thinking particularly here about
their narrow understanding of ‘the right to choose’,
conceptualized primarily in terms of access to
abortion. We must not frame reproductive sovereignty as a single-issue struggle. Feminists of
colour have long stressed the necessity of a holistic
understanding of ‘choice’, with the reproductive
justice movement explicitly combining agitation
for reproductive rights with engagement around
117

xenofeminist technologies

wider social issues. Proponents of reproductive
justice have eschewed a tight focus on fertility
control in favour of building networks of solidarity around housing, employment, child care, and
many other issues – all of which impact upon the
ability to exercise meaningful choice.
As we have seen throughout this text, a truly
emancipatory gender politics needs to think
beyond biological reproduction and extend more
thoroughly towards social reproduction (a point
that activists of colour have been careful to
stress). So far, our discussion has touched upon
how the self-help movement reached out to other
pro-choice organizations, but it has yet to challenge the understanding of choice upon which
such a framing relies. On this note, I would like
to address one final point of resonance between
the Del-Em and the idea of a xenofeminist
technology – that is, its (partial and potential)
intersectional applicability.
Technologies That Travel:
Intersectional Applications
Menstrual extraction, as a practice combining
technological devices with politicized inter118

xenofeminist technologies

personal interactions, was explicitly developed to
reach different contexts and constituencies, via the
sharable yet adaptable protocol. As we have seen,
the character of these protocols was deliberately
flexible (that is, open to repurposing), and the
terms under which groups used the Del-Em could
be customized according to preference and need.
Such protocol feminism was ‘inventive of practices, manuals, and guidelines that could move
translocally and that explicitly sought to take note
of how power, emotion, and bonding circulated
within clinical settings so as to create less oppressive medical experiences and less pathologizing
research’.75 Reproductive healthcare and fertility
control, thus framed, were viewed as having the
potential to cut across lines of class, race, ability,
and so on – and, indeed, the Del-Em did manage
to exceed its largely white, middle-class context of
invention. The device played a documented role in
Black feminist health initiatives: for example, the
National Black Women’s Health Project in the
US provided information on menstrual extraction via its in-house magazine,76 and included it
as a topic at its annual Wellness Conference.
There are numerous reasons why such a technology might appeal to feminists of colour. As
119

xenofeminist technologies

Angela Davis suggests, noting the unequal distribution of deaths prior to 1973, Black and Puerto
Rican people were ‘far more familiar than their
white sisters with the murderously clumsy scalpels
of inept abortionists seeking profit in illegality’.77
Finding safer forms of abortion was a priority for
these groups, and, indeed, ‘close to half of all the
legal abortions’ immediately following the passage
of Roe v. Wade were received by people of colour.78
However, given that the National Black Women’s
Health Project continued to discuss menstrual
extraction and the Del-Em some decades after
the Roe v. Wade decision, it is apparent that legal
access and increased regulation of providers were
not the only factors motivating feminists of colour
to look towards self-help. Certainly the passage of
the Hyde amendment in 1977 which ‘prohibited
the use of federal Medicaid funds to pay for abortion except when the life of the mother is at risk’79
triggered a wave of changes at the state level that
made abortion less financially accessible to many.
For those receiving public assistance (significant
numbers of whom were people of colour), such
changes reasserted the need to be able to circumnavigate official legal and medical channels of
reproductive healthcare.
120

xenofeminist technologies

But even if abortion was financially and legally
accessible, there were still reasons for people to
seek out other ways of meeting their needs. I
am thinking particularly here of the disproportionately raced occurrences of non-consensual
sterilization in the twentieth century, but we
might also consider the exploitation of non-white
bodies in medical testing, attempts to impose
long-term contraceptives such as Norplant and
Depo-Provera upon welfare recipients, and other
forms of racist, classist, and cissexist disciplining
of bodies.80 Given the compound oppressions
that non-white subjects endure when negotiating
healthcare (in North America and elsewhere), it
is easy to grasp why activists would argue both
for the importance of a more inclusive and representative medical profession and for better
ways in which to circumnavigate this profession
altogether. The potential usefulness of a technology like the Del-Em transcends the limited
context in which it was developed, and (as we
have seen) the use of attendant protocols helps
to encourage this transcendence by fostering
context-sensitive adaptation.
However, a truly intersectional self-help
activism would not be satisfied with claiming
121

xenofeminist technologies

menstrual extraction’s applicability beyond its
original user base. This is something that many
activists were well aware of. Ehrenreich and
English, for example, note that
it would be naive to assume that, because all
women experience medical sexism, all women have
the same needs and priorities at this time. Class differences in the medical treatment of women may
not be as sharp as they were eighty years ago, but
they are still very real. For black women, medical racism often overshadows medical sexism. For
poor women of all ethnic groups, the problem of
how to get services of any kind often overshadows
all qualitative concerns.81

As they neatly put it, ‘A movement that recognizes our biological similarity but denies the
diversity of our priorities cannot be a women’s
health movement, it can only be some women’s
health movement.’82 Indeed, feminists of colour
have been clear in their message that health activism must be about more than fertility control,
and have done a great deal to steer the discourse
on reproduction in a more thorough, nuanced,
and wide-ranging direction.
122

xenofeminist technologies

Davis, for example, notes that ‘Birth control
– individual choice, safe contraceptive methods, as well as abortion when necessary – is a
fundamental prerequisite for the emancipation
of women.’83 However, whilst the ‘progressive
potential of birth control remains indisputable’,84
the history of feminist activism leaves ‘much to
be desired in the realm of challenges to racism
and class exploitation’.85 As she puts it,
If the abortion rights campaign of the early 1970s
needed to be reminded that women of color wanted
desperately to escape the back-room quack abortionists, they should have also realized that these
same women were not about to express pro-abortion statements. They were in favor of abortion
rights, which did not mean that they were proponents of abortion. When Black and Latina women
resort to abortions in such large numbers, the stories they tell are not so much about their desire to
be free of their pregnancy, but rather about the
miserable social conditions which dissuade them
from bringing new lives into the world.86

As this quote indicates, the work of indigenous
activists and feminists of colour has been crucial
123

xenofeminist technologies

in ensuring that issues of social reproduction are
not separated out from those of biological reproduction in our conception of what meaningful
choice looks like.
The idea of self-help ‘connotes some very different meanings’ when used within differently
raced contexts.87 Within the predominately
white women’s health movement, it tends to
refer to a limited range of practices involved in
asserting agency over reproduction, including the
use of specific medical technologies (the speculum, the Del-Em, and so on). Within the Black
women’s health movement, self-help is more
likely to also include the activation of networks
of community support and solidarity in relation
to a wider range of issues – housing provision,
employment, child care, police violence, and (as
the previous chapter gestured towards) access to
air, water, and other resources that are not damagingly toxic. Intersectional understandings of
reproductive justice, then, should not be reduced
to efforts to ensure the legal provision of abortion
or contraception.
As Jennifer Nelson puts it, ‘Demands to satisfy
basic needs cannot be separated from reproductive politics, because a right to reproductive
124

xenofeminist technologies

control is hollow without a right to live free of
hunger, racism, and violence and without the
dignity that facilitates real choices for one’s own
future and community.’88 The SisterSong network – with which the National Black Women’s
Health Project is affiliated – is one example of the
important work being done in this area. On its
website, SisterSong states that: ‘Abortion access is
critical, and women of color and other marginalized women also often have difficulty accessing:
contraception, comprehensive sex education, STI
prevention and care, alternative birth options,
adequate prenatal and pregnancy care, domestic violence assistance, adequate wages to support
our families, safe homes, and so much more.’89
Its proposed strategies seek to address the network of power relations underpinning this fusion
of issues, and recognize reproductive justice as ‘an
opportunity and a call to come together as one
movement with the power to win freedom for all
oppressed people’.90 Thus framed, reproductive
justice becomes the basis of a mass movement
with genuinely intersectional applicability.
If this potential is to be recognized, we must
persistently embrace a more holistic concept of
reproductive justice. Such a characterization is
125

xenofeminist technologies

necessary to ensure that protocols are not unwittingly limited to the concerns of middle-class,
able-bodied, white, cishet women. Reproductive
justice is as much about support for having and
raising children in conditions of safety and freedom as it is about resisting personally unwanted
births. Medical instruments, their protocols, and
the gendered anatomy towards which they are
directed should not be considered the universal
kernel of feminist self-help, with socio-political
issues of particular constituencies positioned as
appendages or optional extras. Instead, we must
see technologies like the Del-Em as helpful but
partial implements within a wider assemblage of
structures, bodies, social relations, and material
artefacts. This is a lesson that xenofeminism must
bear in mind if it wishes to be a meaningfully
coalitional project – that is, if it truly seeks to
be ‘a ready-to-hand tool for multiple political
bodies and something that can be appropriated
against the numerous oppressions that transect
with gender and sexuality’.91
Crucially, SisterSong’s approach to reproductive justice is vocally and explicitly trans*
inclusive. Its website points out that ‘Indigenous
women, women of color, and trans* people
126

xenofeminist technologies

have always fought for Reproductive Justice.’92
Members recently hosted a Twitter discussion on
the topic of ‘queering reproductive justice’, highlighting that the collective’s activist framework
extends to things like access to hormones, the
right to use one’s bathroom of preference, and
advocacy for sex workers. Despite (as I remarked
earlier) the feminism of the second wave sometimes manifesting itself in trans* exclusionary
forms, the work of SisterSong illustrates that there
are nevertheless characteristics of the self-help
movement that can be reclaimed and extended
to the technomaterialist transfeminist projects
of today. Indeed, it is perhaps within the realm
of biotechnologies that we can detect particularly productive intergenerational connections
between feminist projects that might otherwise
seem attitudinally different.
In the final section, I want to trace the connections between the feminist health movement of
the 1970s and more recent interventions around
trans* health issues. Whilst I do not have the space
to explore these entanglements in great detail here,
I hope to at least point to some broad coordinates
of confluence and resonance. This strikes me as
particularly important given recent interventions
127

xenofeminist technologies

that pit these forms of activism against each
other, particularly contextualizing gains for the
LGBTQIA* community in relation to losses
for some feminist or pro-choice positions.93 By
stressing the shared commitments of these movements, I hope to demonstrate that this tendency is
unnecessarily hostile and divisive, whilst continuing to articulate an expanded understanding of
self-help (as a protocol-driven practice, engaged
in by a network of collectives, with the potential
to go beyond a single-issue struggle).
From Self-Help to Transfeminism
The first step in rethinking the legacies of secondwave feminist self-help practices is to resituate
them in the context of their wider influences.
Feminist health activism did not emerge from
the minds of figures like Rothman fully formed,
and nor was it solely the product of the women’s movement; ‘neighbourhood health clinics,
grounded in the civil rights and New Left movements, provided intellectual, political, and
practical experiential precedents for the women’s
health movement’.94 Self-help had to actively
forget its indebtedness to other kinds of activism
128

xenofeminist technologies

in order to decentre race and class within its analysis; the situated knowledges of those dominant
within the movement crowded out other ways of
thinking about reproductive choice.
Following the model of reproductive justice,
any xenofeminist approach must emphasize that
the ‘Y’ in ‘DIY’ never operates in isolation, but
is enmeshed in a web of structural oppressions,
networks of power, and technomaterial relationships. XF must insist upon conceiving of political
agency as necessarily collective, and therefore upon
emancipatory politics as openly and inherently
coalitional. Given that a seemingly oblivious cissexism characterized self-help just as much as its
unwitting racism (in the form of particular lacunas that stymied its ambitions to provide a service
to every feminist), it is important that we finish
by looking more closely at how we might effectively strip the second wave for parts, so as to take
what it can offer (and has already given) to queer
and trans* activism, whilst discarding that which
is unhelpful. This in itself might be positioned as a
practice of repurposing, and therefore as in accordance with a xenofeminist politics of technology.
One vital link in the chain between secondwave self-help and contemporary work on queer
129

xenofeminist technologies

and trans* healthcare is the HIV/AIDS activism
of the 1980s and 1990s – particularly that undertaken by the Women’s Caucus of ACT UP. In
their book Women, AIDS and Activism, members of the Caucus acknowledge their debts to
the feminist health movement, remarking that
‘People with AIDS must become experts about
their bodies, HIV treatments, and wellness maintenance. This mode of empowerment through
knowledge harks back to the women’s self-help
health movement of the 1970s.’95 In the authors’
opinion, reproductive justice and AIDS activism are intimately connected, not only via their
shared emphasis on increasing agency through
knowledge, but also thanks to a common attention to sexual pleasure, and because those with a
positive diagnosis encounter particular challenges
with regard to reproductive rights.
The cyberfeminist group subRosa is amongst
those who have remarked upon affinities between
these two forms of political engagement, linking
this to more recent developments in healthcare
activism and dissident embodiment. It notes that
the tactical activists of ACT-UP contested the
medical system and its treatment of the HIV and

130

xenofeminist technologies
AIDS crisis, and emerged as the direct successors
of the Feminist Health Movement though broadening its strategies and concerns. Within the last
decade, another strong challenge to the medical
establishment has come from genderqueer, transsex
and intersex activists who are contending with biomedical and human rights and legal institutions in
many different ways. The radical body interventions used in both freely chosen and coerced sexual
and gender reassignment surgery and therapy can
often involve procedures such as plastic and reconstructive surgery and psychological counseling, as
well as genetic testing, hormone and drug therapies, stem cell and fertility technologies. Thus
genderqueer people intersect with a wide array of
medical, cultural, and disciplinary systems.96

The legacy of second-wave health activism can be
felt in the transfeminist agitation of today, despite
the fact that there is only limited evidence of
the self-help movement catering to trans* people
directly.97 As subRosa’s comments suggest, selfhelp has become mobile through appropriation;
its ethos has been adopted but extended, its tactics
repurposed by the health activists who practised
in its wake.
131

xenofeminist technologies

Indeed, this is demonstrated in the changing
relationship between trans* politics and the classic
reference text of the feminist self-help movement,
OBOS. We have already seen how this book was
taken up and recontextualized by feminists outside
of the Global North, and how this proliferation
and repurposing ultimately changed the way the
book circulated in the States. It has also been
transformed in various ways by the attentions of
the trans* community. For example, 2014 saw
the publication of a phonebook-sized tome entitled Trans Bodies, Trans Selves: A Resource for the
Transgender Community (TBTS). This text was
explicitly inspired by OBOS, and makes direct
reference to it at several points. The collection
even concludes with an afterword by the Boston
Women’s Health Book Collective, in which the
group acknowledges the deficiencies of its earlier
work in terms of addressing trans* issues.
The authors remark that thanks to TBTS and
‘all the transgender folks who have been writing and teaching over the past many years, we,
a group of cisgender women, now know that we
can no longer say “a women’s body” and mean
only one thing’.98 They then proceed to identify
a range of issues around which a more properly
132

xenofeminist technologies

intersectional health activism might be assembled. These include fuller access to reproductive
health screening – the Pap test, for example, is
‘recommended for people of any gender who
have a cervix’ – and advocacy in terms of making
hormones safer to use.99 The text as a whole
provides verified, accessibly written, and wideranging information, from contributors who are
themselves transgender or genderqueer. As such,
it seeks to provide a quality-assured self-help
resource to its trans* readers.
Of course, TBTS is unlikely to achieve the
prominence of its seventies predecessor, in part
because the internet has so thoroughly transformed the manner in which information about
gendered embodiment and reproductive health
is located. As Susan Stryker notes in Transgender
History, self-published materials such as paperbased newsletters and zines became much less
ubiquitous in the second half of the 1990s, their
‘numbers and frequency [dropping] off precipitously in the middle of the decade in reverse
proportion to the rise of the Internet age’.100 With
the arrival of user-friendly web browsers such
as Netscape Navigator, the internet became ‘a
cheaper distribution outlet than even the cheapest
133

xenofeminist technologies

paper-based, surface-mailed publications – and
once the first generation of search engines made
finding online content as easy as typing a search
term, one capable of reaching vast potential
audiences’.101 From the mid-nineties onwards,
tailored resources emerged online to serve trans*
communities: early examples included Susan’s
Place, which started as a chat room in 1995;
Transsexual and Transgender Road Map, launched
in 1996; and a range of other bulletin boards and
virtual community groups.
These sites enabled people to engage in information sharing, and to better connect for the
purposes of coordinated self-advocacy and
mutual peer support. Those on the receiving end of medical care were no longer simply
the object of a closed discussion internal to the
medical-industrial complex, but positioned as
active subjects, collectively negotiating their own
care and their relationships with providers. As
Stryker puts it, the ‘remarkable expansion of the
transgender movement in the mid-1990s would
not have been possible without the Internet’s
even more remarkable and rapid transformation
of the means of mass communication’.102 This
is not to suggest that the advent of the internet
134

xenofeminist technologies

instantly eradicated all barriers to accessing highquality health and wellbeing data: information
initially remained dispersed and sometimes difficult to find, and was frequently incomplete or
inaccurate – and, of course, the digital divide
meant that access to this brave new world was
extremely uneven. However, the days of borrowing library cards from friendly medical students
were swiftly becoming a thing of the past. The
DIY spirit of any OBOS-style intervention in the
digital age is, I would argue, better reflected in the
forums of the nineties or the online communities
of today than it is in a print publication released
by Oxford University Press. Today, trans* people
who cannot or do not wish to consult a medical
professional are arguably far more likely to turn
to Google or to a subreddit for answers than they
are to consult a self-help book.
However, the connections between contemporary trans* activism and seventies self-help
remain very much apparent. Whilst these connections tend to be overlooked – particularly in
celebratory appraisals of the second wave – a
handful of critics have addressed the evident
common ground between them. Lauren Porsch,
for example, argues that the transgender health
135

xenofeminist technologies

movement followed a similar trajectory to that
underpinning 1970s self-help: ‘negative health
care encounters, which run the gamut from provider ignorance and insensitivity, to purposeful
humiliation, to the actual denial of care’ have
resulted in collective organizing to ‘empower the
transgender community to advocate for their
own needs in the health care setting’.103 Emi
Koyama similarly insists upon the fact that transfeminism emphasizes the profound connections
between trans* emancipation and the rights for
the impregnatable, partly because both depend
on ideas of self-determination and gendered
embodiment: ‘like women seeking an abortion,
our bodies have become an open territory, a
battleground’.104
Adopting a reproductive justice perspective,
Koyama stresses that ‘choice is also about resisting
the coerced sterilization or abortion of less privileged women. Likewise, transfeminism strives for
the right to refuse surgical and hormonal interventions, including those prescribed for intersex
people.’105 Clearly this inclusive framework is
appropriate for coalitional transfeminist activism,
given the need to more fully appreciate the fusion
of structural oppressions many trans* people
136

xenofeminist technologies

encounter (in terms of race, class, immigration
status, sexuality, and so on). The insufficiency
of a narrow focus on conventional healthcare is
particularly obvious when we concentrate upon
the needs of poor trans* communities of colour;
after all, whilst trans* health and wellbeing can
and does incorporate hormone therapy, breast
and chest health, reproductive health screenings,
pregnancy care, and so on, it must also extend
to protection from violence, homicide prevention, and material action to make all trans* lives
more liveable.
In this chapter, I have used a specific case study
– namely, the Del-Em and the technomaterial
relations surrounding its development – as a
means via which to explore what a xenofeminist
technology might look like. In the process, I have
fleshed out four key principles: the circumnavigation of gatekeepers; repurposing; scalability;
and intersectionality. Ultimately, my case study
has underscored the necessity of adopting a more
comprehensive approach to reproduction – one
that goes beyond biological procreation to confront wider social conditions, but without losing
sight of the body as a potential locus of emancipatory endeavour. In the brief conclusion that
137

xenofeminist technologies

follows, I will expand this analysis, turning to
more recent interventions in gendered embodiment. Where does xenofeminist technopolitics
go from here?

138

Conclusion: Xeno-Reproduction

In this book, I have attempted to conceptualize
xenofeminist principles in relation to the theme of
reproduction. Chapter 1 used Firestone’s work on
assistive reproductive technologies and cybernetic
communism to articulate a tripartite definition of
XF – one grounded in ideas of technomaterialism, anti-naturalism, and gender abolitionism.
By framing these three key characteristics in relation to Firestone’s work, and by emphasizing
their connection with both biological and social
reproduction, we came to understand how they
might function together within a single emancipatory project. In Chapter 2, we considered the
relationship between reproduction and futurity
via a discussion of contemporary eco-activisms.
139

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

We focused on the figure of the Child as an icon
of the perpetuation of racist, heteronormative
class values, whilst problematizing any supposedly forward-looking radical politics based on
‘biopolitical border control’ and the prevention
of future births. Kin making was understood
here as a reorientation of genetic and non-genetic
bonds alike – a privileging of xeno-hospitality
over and against both population control and
naturalized reproductive futurism.
The final chapter extended this discussion to
feminist technologies. We used the example of a
single reproductive ‘handcraft tool’ (and the social
relations surrounding and constituting it) to help
elaborate an XF politics of collective autonomy,
repurposing, scalability, and intersectionality.
Our analysis concluded by insisting upon the
importance of transfeminist reproductive justice frameworks, and by pointing to potential
vectors of solidarity between the self-help and
trans* health movements. Encouragingly – and
relevantly, given Chapter 3’s discussion of menstrual extraction – it seems that attempts to foster
just this kind of solidarity are emerging around
technomaterial projects today. I want to conclude this book by gesturing towards a number
140

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

of initiatives that, in one way or another, resonate
with XF ambitions.
I would argue that we can see the potential
inheritances of a device such as the Del-Em being
played out within the grassroots feminism of the
GynePunk collective – a group that puts into
practice some of the ideas with which xenofeminism grapples in theory. GynePunk taps into
the energy of queer activism, biohacking, and
the maker movement to design free and open
source hardware for self-diagnosis and care. The
group helped develop 3D-printed specula for the
auto-administration of Pap smears, for example,
and assembles functional DIY lab equipment
from technological detritus such as discarded
hard-drive motors and webcams – requisitioning
mundane material artefacts in a manner clearly
reminiscent of the design history of the Del-Em.1
In addition to helping under-served communities (including sex workers, migrants, and trans*
people) to circumnavigate medical gatekeepers,
the GynePunk project espouses a positive ethos
of corporeal self-experimentation. It views the
body as ‘a technology to be hacked, from the
established ideas of gender and sex, to exploring the capacity to start researching ourselves, to
141

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

find our own ideas and technologies, to help us
be free, autonomous and independent from the
system’.2
GynePunk’s activities are largely in keeping with those of feminist self-help. The project
represents ‘Our Bodies, Ourselves updated for a
digitalized and globalized world’,3 and has been
compared to the work of Jane in the 1970s.4
Indeed, GynePunk appears to be deliberately
aligning itself with the heritage of the women’s
health movement when it refers to its members as ‘cyborg witches’.5 The witch – a figure
seen by second-wave feminists as an exemplar of
repressed knowledges and appropriated expertise
– is here upgraded for the twenty-first century
via hybridization with a wider range of technological devices. It is the group’s ‘view of the body
as a technology and their invention of new and
DIY diagnostic tools that marks them as cyborgs;
their reclamation of ancestral women’s knowledge around reproductive health that marks them
as witches’.6
Within GynePunk’s breed of cyborg witchcraft, it is not just devices and their constitutive
parts that are available for deliberate repurposing,
but bodies and ideologies as well. The hallmarks
142

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

of the feminist health activisms of the seventies
are augmented here by a renewed attention to the
mutability of biological materiality, extending to
reproductive embodiment and gender itself. The
result is a technologically literate, (re)purposeful
feminism that addresses itself to people’s specific
health needs rather than to a naturalized idea
of dichotomous gender. This is a vast improvement over potentially exclusionary second-wave
discourses of ‘women’s health in women’s hands’
– a shift that renders self-help far more hospitable
to xenofeminism’s gender abolitionist approach.
Other interventions emerging from within
a renewed (and newly queered) feminist selfhelp tradition include Ryan Hammond’s Open
Source Gender Codes (OSGC) project – an initiative seeking to further bridge the gap between
self-help healthcare and the free and open source
software movement. In a move partially inspired
by Preciado’s work, as well as by the xenofeminist manifesto itself, Hammond engages with
contemporary biohacking practices in an effort
to imagine new ways of disseminating medical
technologies. OSGC seeks to enable people to
grow their own hormones at dedicated community hubs using transgenic tobacco plants – a
143

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

species chosen for its ‘proven ability to manufacture pharmaceutically valuable molecules’.7
The development of a transgenic plant that
‘could allow “laypeople” to grow sex hormones
would not only call into question the cultural and
institutional frameworks that govern queer and
trans bodies, it would also challenge the current
system of pharmaceutical production. Can we
imagine a communal system of pharmaceutical
production in which biological materials are collectively owned?’8 In the spirit of 1970s self-help,
OSGC seeks to develop an accessible method of
producing biotechnologies that can evade gatekeepers and, with them, healthcare profiteering
and oppressive forms of pathologization. As such,
it can be seen as a move against the further enclosure of a once-collective knowledge base, and as
another example of queer cyborgian witchcraft.
These projects add a concrete dimension to
debates about what a xenofeminist technology
might look like. An important caveat before I
conclude, however: our discussions here and in
Chapter 3 have largely focused on technologies
as a means of helping gendered subjects carve
out a space of autonomy within disciplinary
systems that remain difficult to navigate, both
144

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

materially and politically. As such, much of our
analysis has positioned these tools (from menstrual extraction, to self-performed diagnostic
testing, to grow-your-own hormones) as defensive technologies – that is, as means to promote
collective agency over gender and reproductive
embodiment when access to professional care
is somehow limited. For all its XF possibilities,
something like the Del-Em is at best a pragmatic
and transitional device. Instead of accepting the
circumnavigation of gatekeepers as an endpoint
for xenofeminist action, and celebrating the tools
that enable this, it is beholden upon us to devise
ways of extending the project’s reach.
It is not enough to think about routing around
barriers; in order to ensure maximal emancipatory gains, we must facilitate the creation of new
systems. As we remark in the manifesto, from ‘the
global to the local, from the cloud to our bodies,
xenofeminism avows the responsibility in constructing new institutions of technomaterialist
hegemonic proportions’.9 We must be engineers
as well as hackers, conceiving of ‘a total structure
as well as the molecular parts from which it is
constructed’.10 This means leveraging the tactic
of the protocol in search of more efficient ways
145

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

to scale, and engaging an ecology of activisms
that may be better suited to bridging the micro-,
meso-, and macropolitical levels of our complex technomaterial world. Developments such
as GynePunk and OSGC predominantly focus
on workarounds rather than on re-engineering
biotechnical hegemony. Both projects remain
dependent upon the wider medical infrastructure
as it stands.
Just as Jane’s Pap smear service came to rely on
a conventional lab for cytology in the early 1970s,
so too is GynePunk’s focus on the participatory
(anti)clinic somewhat restricted, limited as it is to
sample collection and basic diagnostics. Likewise,
traditional technoscientific settings remain crucial to OSGC. Hammond can aspire to ‘bring
the queer community into the lab’ and to ‘bring
the lab to queer communities’,11 but must continue to rely on established outsourced systems
at both ends of the envisioned DIY process. In
order to successfully develop transgenic tobacco
plants, OSGC requires controlled conditions and
access to scientific resources that are at present
largely privatized. Should the development of
the plants be successful, and a grow-your-own
hormone system become implementable without
146

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

regulatory strictures, existing infrastructure would
still be required for post-processing (including
extraction, purification, and dosage activities).
Once again, we see both the difficulty and the
necessity of scaling up those interventions that
take the individual body as their starting point;
somewhere down the line, established technomaterial conditions and the medical-industrial
complex will reassert themselves. The disruptive practices of DIY gender hacking need to
be complemented by broader attempts to ensure
extensive and enduring change (an area in which
1970s self-help was intermittently successful)
– to reconfigure not only specific bodies and
subjectivities, but also the far-reaching institutional formations of the technomaterial world.
A transfeminist health movement that seeks to
be ‘proportionate to the monstrous complexity of our reality’ must position itself as part
of a wider anti-racist, anti-imperialist, anticapitalist struggle.12 As with the reproductive
justice framework, we must trace the multiple entanglements of health beyond atomized
bodies, medical conditions, and corporeal states
into the interconnected network of oppressions
147

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

and privileges that systematically shape all forms
of embodied experience.
None of this is to deny the necessity of
contemporary, technologically mediated selfhelp projects. The initiatives I have touched
upon here all speak, in various interesting and
important ways, to particular xenofeminist concerns. To remind oneself of their limitations
is to remind oneself of the potential boundaries of XF as a whole – the internal tensions
between its communism and its anarchism; its
dual focus on big-picture counter-hegemonic
projects and small-scale, decentralized interventions; its oscillation between the human and the
posthuman. Whilst one xenofeminist mode celebrates resistance through repurposing, another
points to appropriation itself as an indicator of
disempowerment – a disruption from within
a system that continues to be stacked against
us; a moment of cunning, potentially capable
of achieving specific ends, but by no means an
unqualified good in itself. The challenge, as I
have suggested elsewhere in this book, is to think
mesopolitically – a task for which an emphasis
on both coalitional praxis and thinking through
protocols may provide helpful resources.
148

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

Arguably, the contemporary projects we have
discussed here do attempt to engage with infrastructural change to a greater or lesser extent.
Both gesture towards the wider promise of synthetic biology as a means of undermining the
patent system, for example (though neither
has taken Rothman’s approach of strategically
appropriating intellectual property law to secure
a technology’s free circulation into the future).
However, there is a great deal more to be done,
and we need to ensure that the labour of constructing mesopolitical transits is not allowed to
slip from view. The ultimate aim of a xenofeminist politics of technology should be to transform
political systems and disciplinary structures
themselves, so that autonomy does not always
have to be craftily, covertly, and repeatedly seized
(given that the requirement of such seizure, if
imposed upon an unwilling subject, takes the
form of a burden rather than an emancipatory
exercise of freedom).
To reiterate the point, repurposing must be
viewed as a step towards more durable forms of
transformation. This includes the gradual construction of better forms of (always contingent,
always provisional) technomaterial hegemony, in
149

conclusion: xeno-reproduction

which we do not always have to start from the
need to appropriate things – to turn them radically against their original purposes – because they
were in fact designed with a more accommodating
set of affordances in mind. Technological repurposing may speak to survival pending revolution
(part of a dissident form of social reproduction
that acts as the very underpinning of all possible change). However, ensuring the provision of
safer, cheaper, fully accessible gender-disruptive
and reproductive healthcare should be our priority. I am grateful to have second-wave self-help
to appropriate and learn from, but ultimately
we need to construct alternative models for
xeno-reproduction.

150

Notes

Introduction
1 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism: A Politics for
Alienation’, 2015 (http://www.laboriacuboniks.net).
2 Academic influences include Rosi Braidotti, Wendy
Hui Kyong Chun, Evelyn Fox Keller, Sarah Kember,
Lisa Nakamura, and Judy Wajcman. These thinkers
deserve a prominent place in the genealogies of XF
and contemporary technofeminism, as I have tried
to stress elsewhere: see A. Avanessian and H. Hester
(eds), Dea ex Machina, trans. Jennifer Sophia Theodor
(Berlin: Merve, 2015). Perhaps the most obvious
voices omitted from the current discussion are those
of pre-millennial cyberfeminists – people who are
not only some of Laboria Cuboniks’ most significant
predecessors but also, in several cases, our ongoing collaborators and peers. This includes members of the 90s
cyber-collectives VNS Matrix, the Old Boys Network,

151

notes to pp. 3–10
subRosa, and the Cybernetic Cultures Research Unit
(most notably, Sadie Plant). In side-lining explicit
engagement with such figures, I am in no way seeking to
downplay their influence upon the manifesto. Indeed,
I have directly addressed the connection between 90s
cyberfeminism and contemporary xenofeminist tendencies in other publications: see H. Hester, ‘After
the Future: n Hypotheses of Post-Cyber Feminism’,
Res Gallery: The Kathy Rae Huffman Archive Catalogue
(http://beingres.org/2017/06/30/afterthefuture-helenhester/). I would urge readers to look beyond this little
book to develop a more representative understanding
of XF.

Chapter 1

What is Xenofeminism?

1 S. Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist
Revolution (London: Women’s Press, 1979), 163.
2 Ibid., 182.
3 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
4 N. K. Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual
Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 18.
5 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
6 Firestone, Dialectic, 193.
7 Ibid., 190.
8 S. Franklin, ‘Revisiting Reprotech: Firestone and the
Question of Technology’, in M. Merck and S. Sandford
(eds), The Further Adventures of The Dialectic of Sex:
Critical Essays on Shulamith Firestone (Basingstoke:
Palgrave, 2010), 41.

152

notes to pp. 10–20
9 Ibid., 34.
10 J. Wajcman, Feminism Confronts Technology (Cambridge: Polity, 1991), 23.
11 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
12 Firestone, Dialectic, 188.
13 Ibid., 213.
14 Franklin, ‘Revisiting Reprotech’, 31.
15 M. Mies and V. Shiva, ‘Introduction: Why We Wrote
This Book Together’, in Mies and Shiva, Ecofeminism
(London: Zed Books, 1993), 16.
16 M. Mies, ‘White Man’s Dilemma: His Search For What
He Has Destroyed’, in Mies and Shiva, Ecofeminism,
138.
17 Ibid., 138–9.
18 Ibid., 139.
19 Ibid., 140.
20 Ibid., 139.
21 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
22 I have no wish to diminish the trauma attached
to many experiences of reproductive technologies or
medicalized childbirth. As Firestone herself noted,
under conditions of global capitalism, technologized
reproduction will tend towards the nightmarish
rather than the hopeful (as many of the circumstances surrounding transnational surrogacy suggest).
We must nevertheless insist that there is nothing
inherently masculinist, patriarchal, or discriminatory
about science in itself. It is both a territory for
and a means of enacting emancipatory anti-naturalist
struggles.
23 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.

153

notes to pp. 20–7
24 D. Haraway, Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.
FemaleMan©_Meets_OncoMouse™: Feminism and
Technoscience (New York: Routledge, 1997), 62.
25 E. A. Wilson, Gut Feminism (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2015), 9.
26 Ibid., 45.
27 Ibid., 120.
28 See C. Waldby and M. Cooper, ‘From Reproductive
Work to Regenerative Labour: The Female Body and
the Stem Cell Industries’, Feminist Theory, 11(1) (2010),
3–22.
29 Firestone, Dialectic, 165.
30 N. Power, ‘Toward a Cybernetic Communism:
The Technology of the Anti-Family’, in Merck and
Sandford (eds), Further Adventures, 145.
31 Firestone, Dialectic, 183.
32 S. Sandford, ‘The Dialectic of The Dialectic of Sex’,
in Merck and Sandford (eds), Further Adventures,
249.
33 Firestone, Dialectic, 11.
34 S. Stryker, Transgender History (Berkeley, CA: Seal
Press, 2008), 108.
35 Ibid., 109.
36 In the UK, Sparkle – The National Transgender Charity
sells t-shirts bearing the slogan ‘trans* is not a choice:
transphobia is!’, whilst Trans Media Watch suggests
that ‘Most trans people feel they have no choice at all
about how they live’: ‘Common Misunderstandings’,
2013
(http://www.transmediawatch.org/misunder
standings.html).
37 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.

154

notes to pp. 27–34
38 A. Escalante, ‘Gender Nihilism: An Anti-Manifesto’,
Libcom, 22 June 2016 (https://libcom.org/library/gen
der-nihilism-anti-manifesto).
39 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
40 Escalante, ‘Gender Nihilism’.
41 Ibid.
42 Ibid.
43 In the case of race and class, discriminatory processes
are not typically based on spontaneously occurring
embodied differences – the colour of one’s skin, for
example, bears little relation to one’s ‘Natural’ capacities, but is culturally over-coded with racist ideas of
hierarchy. As such, the XF slogan ‘If Nature is unjust,
change Nature!’ does not apply; the injustice stems not
from Nature (as it is typically understood), but rather
from deeply unequal social relations.
44 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
45 Ibid.
46 Ibid.
47 Ibid.
48 subRosa, ‘Useless Gender: An Immodest Proposal
for Radical Justice’, in Yes Species (Chicago: Sabrosa
Books, 2005), 57.
49 M. Menon, Indifference to Difference: On Queer
Universalism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2015), 41.

Chapter 2 Xenofeminist Futurities
1 L. Edelman, No Future: Queer Theory and the Death
Drive (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004), 3.

155

notes to pp. 34–45
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10
11
12

13
14

Ibid., 19.
Ibid., 132.
Ibid., 75.
M. Mies, ‘Mother Earth’, in J. Hawley (ed.), Why
Women Will Save the Planet (London: Zed Books,
2015), 178.
Ibid., 180.
k. butler and C. Raffensperger, ‘The New Ecofeminism:
Fulfilling Our Sacred Responsibilities to Future
Generations’, Commons Magazine, 7 August 2015
(http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/the-newecofeminism#sthash.Ryg0jCL5.v4vjb9YM.dpbs).
J. McConnell, ‘Ecofeminism and the Future of
Humanism’, Humanism Today, 8 (1993), 113.
See Out of the Woods, ‘The Future is Kids’ Stuff’,
Libcom, 17 May 2015 (https://libcom.org/blog/futurekids-stuff-17052015).
N. Seymour, Strange Natures: Futurity, Empathy, and
the Queer Ecological Imagination (Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 2013), viii.
Edelman, No Future, 2.
A. Gosine, ‘Non-White Reproduction and SameSex Eroticism: Queer Acts Against Nature’, in
C. Mortimer-Sandilands and B. Erickson (eds), Queer
Ecologies: Sex, Nature, Politics, Desire (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 2010), 161.
Ibid., 158.
G. de Chiro, ‘Polluted Politics? Confronting Toxic
Discourse, Sex Panic, and Eco-Normativity’, in
Mortimer-Sandilands and Erickson (eds), Queer
Ecologies, 201.

156

notes to pp. 46–7
15 Indeed, mainstream anti-toxics activism appears to
lean heavily on ideas of racialized (as well as queer)
Otherness. Mel Chen points to twenty-first-century
American media panics about lead paint in an analysis
that neatly bridges reproductive futurity, environmental concerns, and discourses of race: ‘lead’s identity
as a neurotoxic “heavy metal” was attributed to toys
identified as made in China, toys whose decomposable
surfaces when touched yielded up lead for transit into
the bloodstreams of young children’: ‘Toxic Animacies,
Inanimate Affections’, GLQ, 17(2–3) (2011), 267.
16 T. Colborn, D. Dumanoski, and J. P. Myers, Our
Stolen Future: Are We Threatening Our Fertility,
Intelligence, and Survival? A Scientific Detective Story
(New York: Dutton, 1996), 197.
17 Julian Gill-Peterson notes that the testosterone molecule ‘circulates as a chemical index of environmental
toxicity, one among countless drugs flushed through
the industrial water system into rivers and oceans’:
‘The Technical Capacities of the Body: Assembling
Race, Technology, and Transgender’, TSQ, 1(3)
(2014), 403. Eva Hayward, meanwhile, remarks upon
how xenoestrogens ‘found in foods, medicines, fertilizers, cosmetics, sanitary products, and other elements
of material culture leak into habitats, environments,
and ecosystems’: ‘Transxenoestrogenesis’, TSQ, 1(1–2)
(2014), 257.
18 M. Murphy, ‘Distributed Reproduction’, in M. J.
Casper and P. Currah (eds), Corpus: An Interdisciplinary
Reader of Bodies and Knowledge (Basingstoke: Palgrave,
2011), 33.

157

notes to pp. 47–55
19 M. Ah-King and E. Hayward, ‘Toxic Sexes: Perverting
Pollution and Queering Hormone Disruption’,
O-Zone: A Journal of Object-Oriented Studies, 1(1)
(2104), 5.
20 Di Chiro, ‘Polluted Politics?’, 208.
21 A. Shotwell, Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2016), 87.
22 Ibid., 93.
23 N. Power, ‘Non-Reproductive Futurism: Rancière’s
Rational Equality Against Edelman’s Body Apolitic’,
Borderlands, 8(2) (2009), 8.
24 Edelman, No Future, 156–7, n. 14.
25 See J. Nelson, More Than Medicine: A History of the
Feminist Women’s Health Movement (New York: New
York University Press, 2015).
26 J. E. Muñoz, Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of
Queer Futurity (New York: New York University Press,
2009), 94–5.
27 Ibid., 22.
28 Ibid., 96.
29 R. Sheldon, ‘Reproductive Futurism and Feminist
Rhetoric: Joanna Russ’ We Who Are about To . . .’,
Femspec, 10(1) (2009), 19–35 (http://www.femspec.org/
samples/sheldon.html).
30 D. Haraway, ‘Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin’, Environmental
Humanities, 6 (2015), 161 (http://environmentalhumani
ties.org/arch/vol6/6.7.pdf).
31 United Nations Department of Social and Economic
Affairs, ‘World Population to Exceed 10 billion’, 5 May

158

notes to pp. 55–60

32

33
34
35
36
37
38
39

40
41
42
43

2011 (https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/
population/population-exceed-10-billion.html).
S. Hallegatte et al., Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts
of Climate Change on Poverty (Washington, DC:
World Bank Group, 2016), 4 (https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/22787/978146
4806735.pdf).
Haraway, ‘Anthropocene’, 162.
Ibid., 161.
Ibid.
Ibid., 162.
Edelman, No Future, 17.
M. Murphy, Seizing the Means of Reproduction:
Entanglements of Feminism, Health, and Technoscience
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012), 130.
M. Murphy, ‘Economization of Life: Calculative
Infrastructures of Population and Economy’, in
P. Rawes (ed.), Relational Architectural Ecologies:
Architecture, Nature, and Subjectivity (Abingdon:
Routledge, 2013), 146.
D. Haraway, ‘Cyborgs for Earthly Survival!’, London
Review of Books: Letters, 39(13), 29 June 2017 (https://
www.lrb.co.uk/v39/n13/letters).
S. Lewis, ‘Cthulhu Plays No Role for Me’, Viewpoint
Magazine, 8 May 2017 (https://www.viewpointmag.
com/2017/05/08/cthulhu-plays-no-role-for-me/).
A. Y. Davis, Women, Race and Class (New York:
Vintage Books, 1983), 215.
D. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin
in the Chthulucene (Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2016), 138.

159

notes to pp. 60–73
44 Ibid., 138.
45 M. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care:
Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017),
80.
46 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
47 Ibid.
48 Haraway, Staying with the Trouble, 138.
49 R. Sheldon, The Child to Come: Life After the Human
Catastrophe (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2016), 5–6.
50 Ibid., 124.
51 Ibid., 29.

Chapter 3 Xenofeminist Technologies
1 R. Rowan, ‘Extinction as Usual? Geo-Social Futures
and Left Optimism’, e-flux, 31 July 2015 (http://
supercommunity.e-flux.com/texts/extinction-as-usualgeo-social-futures-and-left-optimism/).
2 L. Kaplan, The Story of Jane: The Legendary Underground
Feminist Abortion Service (New York: Pantheon Books,
1995), 197.
3 R. Chalker, ‘Why Menstrual Extraction is a Good
Idea’, On the Issues Magazine, Spring 1993 (http://www.
ontheissuesmagazine . com / 1993spring / Spring1993 _
CHALKER2.php).
4 B. Ehrenreich and D. English, Complaints and
Disorders: The Sexual Politics of Sickness (New York:
Feminist Press, 2011), 156.
5 D. Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The

160

notes to pp. 73–9

6
7
8
9

10

11

12
13

Reinvention of Nature (London: Free Association Press,
1991), 169.
T. Kapsalis, Public Privates: Performing Gynecology
from Both Ends of the Speculum (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 1997), 172.
Ibid., 168.
J. Wajcman, Feminism Confronts Technology
(Cambridge: Polity, 1991), 17.
D. Haraway, ‘The Virtual Speculum in the New
World Order’, in G. Kirkup, L. Janes, K. Woodward,
and F. Hovenden (eds), The Gendered Cyborg: A Reader
(London: Routledge, 2003), 237.
S. L. Vostral and D. McDonagh, ‘A Feminist Inventor’s
Studio’, in L. L. Layne, S. L. Vostral, and K. Boyer
(eds), Feminist Technology (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 2010), 200. Whilst some speculative ideas
have been advanced in more recent years, the classic
speculum design continues to dominate. See A. Pardes,
‘The Speculum Finally Gets a Modern Redesign’,
Wired, 5 October 2017 (https://www.wired.com/story/
the-speculum-finally-gets-a-modern-redesign/).
R. Eveleth, ‘Why No One Can Design a Better
Speculum’, The Atlantic, 17 November 2014 (https://
www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/11/whyno-one-can-design-a-better-speculum/382534/).
Ehrenreich and English, Complaints and Disorders, 31.
Ibid., 35. Elements of this relationship persist to this
day. As Chikako Takeshita remarks in her study of the
IUD, doctors are still ‘the ultimate gatekeepers of women’s choices’. See C. Takeshita, The Global Biopolitics
of the IUD: How Science Constructs Contraceptive Users

161

notes to pp. 79–87

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

23

and Women’s Bodies (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2012), 103.
K. Davis, The Making of Our Bodies, Ourselves: How
Feminism Travels Across Borders (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2007), 121.
Ibid.
Kaplan, The Story of Jane, ix–x.
Ibid., 130.
Ibid.
Ibid., xi.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 160.
P. B. Preciado, Testo Junkie: Sex, Drugs, and Biopolitics
in the Pharmacopornographic Era, trans. B. Benderson
(New York: Feminist Press, 2013), 55.
J. Rivas, ‘Intoxication and Toxicity in a
Pharmacopornographic Era: Beatriz Preciado’s Testo
Junkie’, paper presented to Intoxication conference,
Paris, 28 June 2013. The Harry Benjamin International
Gender Dysphoria Association was the predecessor of
the World Professional Association for Transgender
Health.
R. Lane, ‘Paradigm and Power Shifts in the Gender
Clinic’, in L. Manderson (ed.), Technologies of
Sexuality, Identity, and Sexual Health (Abingdon:
Routledge, 2012), 205. Whilst Lane believes that more
collaborative models of care are emerging, there are
still hurdles in terms of equality of access. In cases
where healthcare is largely privatized, the conditions
trans* people are expected to meet in order to obtain a
diagnosis (and therefore treatment) may be somewhat
lower. However, both diagnosis and treatment may

162

notes to pp. 87–94

24

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

33

by financially inaccessible to most. In countries with
public health services, the costs to the individual may
be reduced, but there may be delays in treatment, and
diagnoses may be made on the basis of more restrictive
conditions.
Royal College of Psychiatrists, ‘Good Practice
Guidelines for the Assessment and Treatment of
Adults with Gender Dysphoria’, College Report CR181,
October 2013, 21 (http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/files/pdf
version/CR181_Nov15.pdf).
Ibid., 25.
Preciado, Testo Junkie, 348.
Ibid., 149.
Ibid., 55.
Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
Ibid.
Ibid.
A. Samuel, ‘Why the Future of the Internet May Depend
on the History of Abortion’, JSTOR Daily, 31 May
2016
(https://daily.jstor.org/why-the-future-of-theinternet-may-depend-on-the-history-of-abortion/).
Indeed, mesh networks have already proved their
usefulness in civil uprisings. The Firechat messaging
app, for example – which was originally intended as a
way for people to connect whilst off-the-grid at music
festivals – has played a role in student-led protests in
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and elsewhere. See M. Castillo,
‘How a Chat App for Burning Man Turned into a
Tool for Revolution’, Adweek, 25 March 2015 (http://
www.adweek.com/digital/how-chat-app-burningman-turned-tool-revolution-163665).

163

notes to pp. 95–108
34
35
36
37
38
39

40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58

Samuel, ‘Why the Future’.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
L. Fraser, ‘Xenofeminism and New Tactics for the
Left’, interview with L. Fraser by M. Gerges for
Canadian Art, 6 February 2017 (http://canadianart.ca/
features/xenofeminism).
F. Davis, Moving the Mountain: The Women’s Movement
in America Since 1960 (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1999), 232.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 157–8.
See Kaplan, The Story of Jane, 197.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 155.
Ibid.
Davis, The Making of Our Bodies, Ourselves, 201.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Davis, Moving the Mountain, 233.
Ehrenreich and English, Complaints and Disorders,
156–7.
Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 115–16.
Kaplan, The Story of Jane, 176.
Ibid.
Ibid., 176–7.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 116.
Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 28–9.
A. R. Galloway and E. Thacker, The Exploit: A Theory

164

notes to pp. 108–17

59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

67
68
69

70
71
72
73
74

of Networks (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2007), 28.
Ibid., 29.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid., 30.
Ibid., 54.
Ibid., 98.
Ibid., 100.
Davis, Moving the Mountain, 234. In 1972, for example, self-help originator Carol Downer was arrested for
applying yogurt to a ‘patient’s’ cervix in an attempt to
relieve the symptoms of an infection. She was charged
with practising medicine without a licence, but was
later acquitted.
Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
Murphy, Seizing the Means, 161–3.
H. Hester, ‘Synthetic Genders and the Limits of
Micropolitics’, . . .ment Journal, 2015 (http://journal
ment . org / article / synthetic - genders - and - limits - micro
politics).
A. Corsani, ‘Beyond the Myth of Woman: The
Becoming-Transfeminist of (Post-)Marxism’, SubStance, 36(1) (2007), 116.
Nelson, More Than Medicine, 108.
Kaplan, The Story of Jane, 45.
Ibid.
This is not to say that all of these developments
lasted into the present day. The feminist health
agenda shifted in response to the changing landscape
of neoliberalism. Protocols were extended via the

165

notes to pp. 117–24

75
76

77
78
79
80

81
82
83
84
85
86
87

work of NGOs, but the movement’s more radical
gender-political positions were largely abandoned.
Instead, an individualized, depoliticized understanding of health took precedence. Many feminist health
facilities were also eventually forced to close owing to
financial pressures. See Murphy, Seizing the Means.
M. Murphy, ‘Unsettling Care: Troubling Transnational
Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health Practices’, Social
Studies of Science, 45(5) (2015), 3.
S. Morgen, Into Our Own Hands: The Women’s
Health Movement in the United States, 1969–1990 (New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2002), 244,
n. 3.
Davis, Women, Race and Class, 204.
Ibid.
Morgen, Into Our Own Hands, 199.
Native American people suffering from alcoholism
were often provided with Depo-Provera as a means of
preventing Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (even in the case
of medical contraindications). Rather than seeking to
treat the underlying disease, doctors typically preferred
to focus on reducing the number of births. See Nelson,
More Than Medicine.
Ehrenreich and English, Complaints and Disorders,
158–9.
Ibid., 159.
Davis, Women, Race and Class, 202.
Ibid.
Ibid., 203.
Ibid., 204.
Morgen, Into Our Own Hands, 244, n. 3.

166

notes to pp. 125–31
88 Nelson, More Than Medicine, 14.
89 SisterSong, ‘What is Reproductive Justice?’ n.d. (http://
sistersong.net/reproductive-justice/).
90 Ibid.
91 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
92 SisterSong, ‘What is Reproductive Justice?’
93 See R. Lipsitz, ‘The Pivotal Issue That Pro-Trans
Rights Celebrities Remain Oddly Silent About’,
Bustle, 3 May 2016 (https://www.bustle.com/articles/
154340-the-pivotal-issue-that-pro-trans-rights-celebri
ties-remain-oddly-silent-about); K. Pollitt, ‘There’s a
Reason Gay Marriage Is Winning, While Abortion
Rights Are Losing’, The Nation, 22 April 2015 (https://
www . thenation . com / article / theres - reason - gay marriage-winning-while-abortion-rights-are-losing/);
J. Michaelson, ‘Ten Reasons Women Are Losing
While Gays Keep Winning’, The Daily Beast, 6
July 2014 (http://www.thedailybeast.com/ten-reasonswomen-are-losing-while-gays-keep-winning).
94 Nelson, More Than Medicine, 57.
95 M. Banzhaf, T. Morgan, and K. Ramspacher,
‘Reproductive Rights and AIDS: The Connections’, in
ACT UP/NY Women and AIDS Book Group (eds),
Women, AIDS and Activism (Boston: Southend Press,
1992), 204.
96 subRosa, ‘Useless Gender’, 55–6.
97 One of the only references I can find to the movement
engaging with trans* people occurs in Nelson’s More
Than Medicine, which quotes a member of a self-help
workshop: ‘We had one person who today we would
say was transgender, assigned male but now out as

167

notes to pp. 131–6

98

99
100
101
102
103

104

105

female. It was much more a phenomenon of stretching
our understanding by learning about [. . .] gender differences that were not before even a subject to talk about’
(95). Whilst trans* issues may have felt alien to this
interviewee, it strikes me as odd that recent appraisals
of 1970s self-help do so little to address the topic. They
tend to be far more sensitive to the pervasive whiteness
of the movement than they are to its tacit cissexism.
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective, ‘Afterword:
A Message from the Founders of the Boston Women’s
Health Book Collective’, in L. Erickson-Schroth
(ed.), Trans Bodies, Trans Selves: A Resource for the
Transgender Community (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2014), 592.
Ibid.
Stryker, Transgender History, 146.
Ibid.
Ibid.
L. Porsch, ‘Women’s Health/Transgender Health:
Intersections’, in B. Seaman and L. Eldridge (eds),
Voices of the Women’s Health Movement: Vol. 1 (New
York: Seven Stories Press, 2012), 392.
E. Koyama, ‘The Transfeminist Manifesto’, in
R. Dicker and A. Piepmeier (eds), Catching a
Wave: Reclaiming Feminism for the Twenty-First
Century (Boston: Northeastern University Press,
2003), 255.
Ibid.

168

notes to pp. 141–7
Conclusion: Xeno-Reproduction
1 See E. Chardronnet, ‘GynePunk, the Cyborg Witches
of DIY Gynaecology’, Makery, 30 June 2015 (http://
www . makery . info / en / 2015 / 06 / 30 / gynepunk - les sorcieres-cyborg-de-la-gynecologie-diy/).
2 D. Bierend, ‘Meet the GynePunks Pushing the
Boundaries of DIY Gynaecology’, Motherboard, 21
August 2015 (https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/
article / qkvyjw / meet - the - gynepunks - pushing - the boundaries-of-diy-gynecology).
3 K. Oakes, ‘GynePunks: A Hacker’s Guide to
Reimagining Women’s Health’, Ob.Gyn. News, 1
November 2015 (http://www.mdedge.com/obgynnews/
article / 103599 / gynecology / gynepunks - hackers - guide reimagining-womens-health).
4 E. D. Thorburn, ‘Cyborg Witches: Class Composition
and Social Reproduction in the GynePunk Collective’,
Feminist Media Studies, 17(2) (2017), 164.
5 Chardronnet, ‘GynePunk’.
6 Thorburn, ‘Cyborg Witches’, 163.
7 R. Hammond, ‘Scientific Strategies Overview’,
OSG, 2016 (http://ryanhammond.us/opensourcegen
dercodes_nj.html).
8 R. Hammond, ‘Open Source Gendercodes’, OSG, 2015
(http://opensourcegendercodes.com/projects/osg/).
9 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.
10 Ibid.
11 Hammond, ‘Open Source Gendercodes’.
12 Laboria Cuboniks, ‘Xenofeminism’.

169

